 Published online: 20 September 2023 
Intern. J. Comput.-Support. Collab. Learn (2023) 18:323–327
© International Society of the Learning Sciences, Inc. 2023
 
 Carolyn P. Rosé
cp3a@andrew.cmu.edu
Sanna Järvelä
sanna.jarvela@oulu.fi
1 
Carnegie Mellon University Language Technologies Institute and HCI Institute, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA
2 
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
Enhancing student learning and achievement through 
orchestration of group processes and group composition
Carolyn P. Rosé1 · Sanna Järvelä2
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-023-09408-x
Introduction
Fall is a time of new beginnings, when we consider the academic calendar, and yet it is 
also the time of year when we become aware of closings on the horizon as the year begins 
to draw to a close. Because of that, the Fall is an excellent time for reflection, and in this 
September issue of the International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learn-
ing, we reflect on the importance of productive collaborative processes, with an emphasis 
on feedback processes, and the scaffolding that upholds and promotes productive learning 
processes, whether it is explicit or implicit. In particular, this issue features four full articles, 
two of which focus directly on intervention studies with a focus on promoting productive 
collaborative processes through explicit scaffolding, and two of which focus on differen-
tial effects of feedback based on features of the feedback, in one case informing design of 
implicit scaffolding of processes through orchestration of group composition.
The impact of supportive interventions promoting positive group 
processes
In the first article entitled “Exploring the Impact of Chat-Based Collaborative Activities and 
SRL Focused Interventions on Students’ Self-Regulation Profiles, Participation in Collab-
orative Activities, Retention, and Learning in MOOCs”, Georgios Psathas, Stergios Tegos, 
Stavros N. Demetriadis and Thrasyvoulos Tsiatsos present an investigation into a three con-
dition intervention study situated within a Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) for teach-
1 3
C. P. Rosé, S. Järvelä
ing computer programming. Though MOOCs are of great interest to the CSCL community 
(Wise & Schwarz, 2017), and though they have been the topic of papers at our conferences 
as well as discussions in symposia, this is the first ijCSCL article presenting an analysis of 
data from an intervention study embedded within a MOOC. It is an excellent example of a 
valid experimental design embedded within a MOOC, where there are difficult challenges 
with respect to experimental control. As a twist on a prior approach to addressing attrition 
challenges by waiting for group assignment until after students have completed some indi-
vidual work (Wen et al., 2017), the investigators were clever in waiting until students had 
completed a questionnaire, which not only addressed the attrition issue but also enabled 
identifying four common latent student profiles and then performing a stratified random 
assignment of students to conditions, with equal representation of the latent student profiles 
across conditions. This careful setup afforded an elaborate analysis of learning and retention 
as it related to important measures of Self-Regulated Learning (SRL) and participation in 
collaborative activities.
The goal of the study was to investigate the interplay between personal characteris-
tics of students and supportive interventions on student participation in chat activities and 
subsequently their retention in the course. MOOC students were assigned to one of three 
conditions, namely: control, general intervention, and personalized intervention. The exper-
imental manipulation happened outside of the collaborative-chat activities and determined 
the kind of support, if any, offered through email messages that occurred at regular intervals 
throughout the course. Students were all offered the opportunity to participate in chat-based 
collaborative activities regardless of condition. While prior work investigating the impact 
of chat activities on retention in MOOCs demonstrated that participation in the collabora-
tive activities promoted retention, the majority of students in that past study did not choose 
to participate in the chat activities (Tomar et al., 2016). Thus, this current study that dem-
onstrates the impact of an intervention outside of the chat activities that promotes student 
participation in the chat activities themselves is an important landmark.
The second article, by Yuyao Tong and Carol K. K. Chan, is entitled “Promoting 
Knowledge Building through Meta-Discourse and Epistemic Discourse Understanding”. 
This article presented a quasi-experimental design contrasting two classrooms, both using 
Knowledge Forum, but under different conditions. This study is one in a long history of 
Knowledge Forum studies featured in this journal (e.g., Zhang et al., 2020; van Aalst, 2009). 
While a great many past studies of Knowledge Forum presented analyses that focused on 
classroom communities where everyone experienced the same intervention, this study offers 
the opportunity for statistical contrast between students in a class where the intervention is 
present within the Knowledge Forum and a class where it was not present. The experimental 
contrast focused on enrichment of meta-discourse in the midst of knowledge building. An 
interesting aspect of the meta-discourse that students participated in was that they expressed 
their ideas about the discourse graphically through drawings.
A wide variety of data were collected throughout the study, including video, tests, and 
the discourse itself from Knowledge Forum. Analysis of the discourse collected during the 
study was supported through an analytics-based tool used in past studies of Knowledge 
Forum, referred to as KBDeX (Oshima et al., 2012). The analysis provides the opportunity 
to view through rich, qualitative analysis the impact of metacognitive reflection, principle-
based inquiry, and idea development on inquiry in Knowledge Forum. Though study of 
discourse processes, how they can be scaffolded, and how they promote learning and other 
1 3
 324
Enhancing student learning and achievement through orchestration of…
collaborative outcomes is frequent in the CSCL literature, far less has focused on meta-level 
understanding of discourse or meta-discourse processes. This study demonstrates a clear 
impact of meta-discourse on collaboration that widened over time, which makes a compel-
ling argument for the importance of this work to the community.
Group composition effects on supportive feedback processes
The second pair of articles in this September issue focus on features of feedback that affect 
the quality and impact of the feedback, for example, in one case the type and depth of feed-
back, and the other case the source of feedback in terms of the relative skill level of provider 
and recipient of the feedback. In the first case, the feedback under investigation occurred 
between members of different collaborative groups within the same classroom, as part of a 
computer-supported collaborative learning activity. In the second study, the data came from 
a peer review activity within a classroom that occurred after individual students completed 
a writing assignment on their own. Considering these articles together, we are reminded that 
feedback between students is valuable both in collaborative and individual learning settings. 
In both cases students offer cognitive scaffolding to one another in their interaction, even if 
the interaction is not synchronous (i.e., through peer feedback on writing, where each con-
tribution to the discussion occurs at a distinct time point, namely, the time of article writing, 
the time of feedback writing, and the time of feedback receipt).
The first of this second pair of articles is by Jesmine S. H. Tan, Wenli Chen, Junzhu Su 
and Guo Su, entitled “The Mechanism and Effect of Classwide Peer Feedback on Concep-
tual Knowledge Improvement: Does Different Feedback Type Matter?”. In that article a 
qualitative analysis of feedback processes is conducted as an exploratory case study after a 
CSCL activity employing the Spiral Model of collaboration (Chen et al., 2021), which was 
determined to be successful in producing significant pre-to-posttest gains in knowledge as 
measured by a test. During the activity, students offered feedback to one another through a 
structured, peer critique interface. The connection between feedback, knowledge improve-
ment, and learning is investigated in the analysis. A script prompts students to push for 
deeper and deeper feedback and discussion. Results showed that feedback that probed for 
deeper conceptual understanding were particularly effective, though they were cognitively 
more demanding.
The final article of this September issue is by Zheng Zong and Christian D. Schunn, enti-
tled “Does Matching Peers at Finer-Grained Levels of Prior Performance Enhance Gains in 
Task Performance from Peer Review?”. In this article, a secondary data analysis simulating 
an experimental study is presented of data collected from 3 large classrooms where a peer 
review activity with the Peerceptiv system (Wu & Schunn, 2022) was conducted. Results 
from the study could inform development of an automated algorithm to group students for 
interaction based on a policy considering skill level of the students, in this case to offer one 
another feedback on writing. As in the Tan et al. study, feedback was offered through a struc-
tured peer feedback interface, which is a form of explicit scaffolding for processes. How-
ever, in contrast, interventions that group students in order to promote productive learning 
processes can be regarded as implicit scaffolding for collaboration (Wang et al., 2017).
The research aimed to identify the optimal level of detail regarding assessment of skill 
for the purpose of assigning students to effective pairings. Past work on pairing based on 
1 3
325
C. P. Rosé, S. Järvelä
skill level with a coarse grained approach failed to demonstrate an impact of this intentional 
pairing. In this study, both a coarse grained and a fine grained approach were evaluated and 
then contrasted. The analysis of results demonstrated that fine grained matching is needed in 
order to yield a significant effect. An interesting feature of the analysis of results is that the 
impact of the intervention was evaluated both at the whole class level as well as at the subset 
level (e.g., within ability level groupings). Since fine-grained matching by ability level was 
demonstrated to be optimal except in pairs where both are at the very low ability level, it is 
necessary to consider the relationship between effects of differently nuanced policies from 
the receiver level and the giver level, as measured within ability level groupings and over 
the class as a whole in order to make an informed decision for a specific class, with its own 
unique distribution of skill levels across students.
Conclusion
The four articles of this September issue of the International Journal of Computer-Supported 
Collaborative Learning are interesting as a set in that they highlight a multiplicity of dif-
ferent research methodologies employed by CSCL researchers. These methodologies span 
from quantitative to qualitative to mixed-methods approaches, in most cases with new data, 
but sometimes including secondary data analysis, as in the final paper of this issue. Types 
of data include the gamut from video, to drawings, to tests and questionnaires. Within this 
diversity of methodological practices, common themes related to student learning through 
the cognitive scaffolding they offer each other run throughout this issue.
References
Chen, W., Tan, J. S., & Pi, Z. (2021). The spiral model of collaborative knowledge improvement: An explor-
atory study of a networked collaborative classroom. International Journal of Computer-Supported Col-
laborative Learning, 16, 7–35. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-021-09338-6. https://link.springer.com/
article/.
Oshima, J., Oshima, R., & Matsuzawa, Y. (2012). Knowledge building discourse explorer: A social network 
analysis application for knowledge building discourse. Educational Technology Research and Develop-
ment, 60, 903–921. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-012-9265-2. https://link.springer.com/article/.
Psathas, G., Tegos, S., Demetriadis, S. N., & Tsiatsos, T. (this issue). Exploring the Impact of Chat-Based 
Collaborative Activities and SRL Focused Interventions on Students’ Self-Regulation Profiles, Par-
ticipation in Collaborative Activities, Retention, and Learning in MOOCs, International Journal of 
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning https://link.springer.com/article/https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11412-023-09394-0.
Tan, J., Chen, W., Su, J., & Su, G. (this issue). The Mechanism and Effect of Classwide Peer Feedback on 
Conceptual Knowledge Improvement: Does Different Feedback Type Matter? International Journal of 
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning https://link.springer.com/article/https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11412-023-09390-4.
Tomar, G., Sankaranaranayan, S., Wang, X., & Rosé, C. P. (2016). Coordinating Collaborative Chat in 
Massive Open Online Courses, In Proceedings of the international conference of the learning sci-
ences (pp. 607– 614). International Society of the Learning Sciences https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/
papers/1704/1704.05543.pdf.
Tong, Y., & Chan, C. K. K. (this issue).Promoting Knowledge Building through Meta-Discourse and Epis-
temic Discourse Understanding, International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning 
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11412-023-09403-2.
1 3
 326
Enhancing student learning and achievement through orchestration of…
Van Aalst, J. (2009). Distinguishing knowledge-sharing, knowledge-construction, and knowledge-creation 
discourses. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 4, 259–287.https://
link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11412-009-9069-5.
Wang, X., Wen, M., & Rosé, C. (2017). Contrasting explicit and implicit support for transactive exchange in 
team oriented project based learning. International Society of the Learning Sciences.
Wen, M., Maki, K., Dow, S., Herbsleb, J. D., & Rosé, C. (2017). Supporting virtual team formation through 
community-wide deliberation. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction (PACMHCI), 
Volume 1(Issue CSCW Article No.: 109), 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1145/3134744.
Wise, A. F., & Schwarz, B. B. (2017). Visions of CSCL: Eight provocations for the future of the field. Interna-
tional Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 12, 423–467.https://link.springer.com/
article/10.1007/s11412-017-9267-5.
Wu, Y., & Schunn, C. D. (2022, November). A Review of Empirical Studies on Peerceptiv. In 2022 20th 
International Conference on Information Technology Based Higher Education and Training (ITHET) 
(pp. 1–6). IEEE.
Zhang, J., Yuan, G., & Bogouslavsky, M. (2020). Give student ideas a larger stage: Support cross-community 
interaction for knowledge building. International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learn-
ing, 15, 389–410. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-020-09332-4. https://link.springer.com/article/.
Zong, Z., & Schunn, C. (this issue). Does matching peers at finer-grained levels of prior performance enhance 
gains in Task performance from peer review? International Journal of Computer-Supported Collabora-
tive Learning. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11412-023-09401-4.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3
327

