 
CSCL 2023 Proceedings 
 
© ISLS 
378 
Studying Interdisciplinary Collaboration as a Core Skill 
 
Rosanna Vitiello, Carnegie Mellon University, rvitiell@andrew.cmu.edu 
Joey Huang, University of California, Irvine, chujenh@uci.edu 
Samantha Speer, Carnegie Mellon University, snspeer@andrew.cmu.edu 
Nickolina Yankova, University of California, Irvine, nyankova@uci.edu 
Kylie Peppler, University of California, Irvine, kpeppler@uci.edu 
Melisa Orta-Martinez, Carnegie Mellon University, mortamar@andrew.cmu.edu 
Carolyn Rosé, Carnegie Mellon University, cprose@cs.cmu.edu 
 
Abstract: At its core, collaboration is about bringing diverse perspectives together to create 
something new.  Diversity may arise along a multiplicity of dimensions, leading to some very 
similar challenges, and other dimension-specific challenges, each of which require discrete 
skills to address. Interdisciplinary collaboration, while understudied, has particular workplace 
relevance.  This research seeks to understand what is specific to interdisciplinary collaboration 
as part of a broader agenda to operationalize key underlying skills that enable interdisciplinary 
collaboration and subsequently assess and support interdisciplinary collaboration, both in the 
classroom and in the workplace. The aim of this poster presentation is to engage the community 
in an intellectual exchange about underlying questions to inform work in progress. 
Introduction and scope setting 
Just as research in the field of computer-supported collaborative learning (CSCL) calls out interaction processes 
that result in integration of diverse perspectives, interdisciplinarity is a key facet of research in the field of CSCL 
(Hmelo-Silver & Jeong, 2021), including novel methodologies it has produced to carry out this mission (Suthers, 
Lund, Rosé & Teplovs, 2013).  Nevertheless, while a key argument in favor of adoption of CSCL practices in the 
classroom is the opportunity to foster skills needed in the typically diverse and multidisciplinary workplace and 
in the broader societal contexts of adult life, much remains to be accomplished in this transfer.  
Informed by past work in CSCL on this topic (Peppler & Wohlwend, 2017), we conceptualize 
interdisciplinarity in the following ways: (1) Composition of a team (i.e., members with different disciplinary 
expertise); (2) Property of work (i.e., requiring expertise from multiple disciplines in order for the work to proceed 
successfully); (3) Property of a work product (i.e., evidence within an artifact that multiple bodies of work were 
leveraged in producing it); (4) Property of a thinking process (i.e., interaction practices that foster drawing from 
multiple bodies of knowledge in the mental construction of an idea or plan); (5) Property of a curriculum (i.e., 
course curriculum includes experiences that target impartation of knowledge from different disciplinary bodies of 
knowledge; and (6) Property of an individual (i.e., through measurements of group effectiveness during course 
activities, study participants demonstrate skills that enable them to participate in interdisciplinary teams, engaging 
in interdisciplinary work to produce products exhibiting interdisciplinarity by engaging in interdisciplinary 
thinking along with diverse others). The focus of our work is on the sixth aspect, namely interdisciplinarity as a 
core collaborative skill possessed by an individual that enables overcoming challenges and contributing towards 
effective collaboration in multi-disciplinary teams.  While interdisciplinary collaboration is a long-time interest 
of the field of CSCL, there is a dearth of work targeting this critical aspect.   
Unpacking interdisciplinary collaboration as a core skill 
Unlike general collaboration between contributors from different perspectives, the joint work of interdisciplinary 
collaboration is more intensely jigsaw-shaped, where contributors not only have independent roles based on 
expertise but are also working within different resource constraints, reward structures, and expectations with 
respect to work practices, all of which result in the potential for different types and intensities of conflict within 
groups that must be anticipated, planned for, detected, and then mitigated. To aid in the teaching of this approach, 
interdisciplinary curricula may serve as one type of pathway towards development of these skills.  
Our specific focus is on interdisciplinarity as a skill possessed by an individual, which can be assessed 
and further developed through collaborative experiences with diverse others. The bulk of relevant past work began 
in the field of Engineering, which has named this form of interdisciplinarity as a core competency for future 
engineers (National Academy of Engineering, 2004). The field of Engineering defines interdisciplinarity as the 
ability to understand designs as situated in complex social, historical, political, and cultural contexts, and to be 
able to access, understand, evaluate, synthesize, and apply information and knowledge from diverse fields in their 
designs (Lattuca, Knight, & Bergom, 2012). At the heart of the work is the operationalization and measurement 
 
CSCL 2023 Proceedings 
 
© ISLS 
379 
of interdisciplinarity as a core skill, which comprises a self-report questionnaire developed to ask individuals to 
assess their own values, beliefs, dispositions, and abilities (Lattuca, Knight, & Bergom, 2012).  Lattuca & 
colleagues report some attempt to measure the reliability and validity of this instrument. Their instrument has 
been taken up and applied by others in a nationwide investigation of engineering programs. The predictions from 
the instrument are consistent with what one would expect from a valid measure of interdisciplinarity, namely that 
exposure to a diversity of experiences, especially outside of engineering as a field, contributes to its development 
over time as does a stated culture of openness and support of interdisciplinary values (Jamieson & Lohmann, 
2012).  The question of whether the individuals rated highly by this construct are able to go on to participate more 
effectively in interdisciplinary teams because of the qualities measured by this instrument remains open. 
We build on this past work, delving into the psychological foundations of this conceptualization of 
interdisciplinarity as a core skill, connecting it with the broader conceptualization of skills enabling Socially 
Shared Regulation of Learning (SSRL) (Hadwin, Järvelä, & Miller, 2017).  In particular, in addition to domain 
expertise to contribute to a collaboration and an interest in and appreciation for the expertise of diverse others, 
interdisciplinarity requires noticing where diverse values, interests, and knowledge may lead to conflict and then 
planning and executing steps to manage and navigate those encounters. In that light, we explore the limitations of 
this past operationalization and measurement instrument. To that end, we will report our work towards an 
observational measure developed to bolster the existing self-report measurement with more directly observable 
quantities. We report on an analysis of data from two college level courses bringing together matrix mathematics, 
mechatronics, computer science, and textiles. The analysis includes data from collaborative groups who share 
expertise as they negotiate trade-offs within collaborative design tasks. These data illustrate collaborative learning 
processes and challenges in the context of interdisciplinary collaboration.  Our data includes video, audio, and 
chat from collaborating groups in which individuals have taken the Lattuca assessment as pre and post 
assessments. Thus, we align predictions from that assessment with the reality of collaborative work and find the 
Lattuca instrument lacking. 
In addition to highlighting analysis of the data collected so far, at our poster presentation we will report 
work in progress towards a new theoretical framework that paves the way to needed research on interdisciplinarity 
as a core skill situated within learning sciences theories and methods, including an experimental study designed 
similarly to past studies of SSRL. In particular, we unpack this conceptualization through the lens of research on 
its assessment, and consider how research on collaborative support, processes, and outcomes relate to these 
operationalizations but leave challenges and opportunities for the field going forward. We consider how CSCL in 
the classroom might aim to prepare students for more challenging collaborations in the workplace and beyond.  
References 
Hadwin, A., Järvelä, S., & Miller, M. (2017). Self-regulation, co-regulation, and shared regulation in collaborative 
learning environments. In Handbook of self-regulation of learning and performance (pp. 83-106). 
Routledge. 
Hmelo-Silver, C. E., & Jeong, H. (2021). An Overview of CSCL Methods. In U. Cress, C. Rosé, A. F. Wise, & 
J. Oshima (Eds.), International Handbook of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 65–83). 
Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65291-3_4 
Lattuca, L. R., Knight, D. B., & Bergom, I. M. (2012, June). Developing a measure of interdisciplinary 
competence for engineers. In 2012 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition (pp. 25-415). 
Jamieson, L. H. & Lohmann, J. R. (2012).  Innovation with Impact: Creating a Culture for Scholarly and 
Systematic Innovation in Engineering Education, Washington, DC: American Society for Engineering 
Education. 
National Academy of Engineering. (2004). The engineer of 2020: Visions of engineering in the new century. 
National Academies Press. 
Peppler, K. & Wohlwend, K. (2017). Theorizing the nexus of STEAM practice. In J. Katz-Buonincontro and C. 
Conway (eds.), Arts Education Policy Review Special Issue: Gathering STEAM (pp. 1-12). Routledge 
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/10632913.2017.1316331. 
Suthers, D. D., Lund, K., Rosé, C. P., & Teplovs, C. (2013). Achieving productive multivocality in the analysis 
of group interactions. In Productive multivocality in the analysis of group interactions (pp. 577-612). 
Springer, Boston, MA. 
Acknowledgments 
This research was funded by the NSF research grant 2100401

