Arch Neurocien (Mex)| e-ISSN 2954-4122  | Volume 28, number 2, year 2023
archivosdeneurociencias.org |  35
Evidence synthesis
received 10 November 2022 | accepted 26 February 2023 | published 28 February 2023
“2023 © National Institute of Neurology and Neurosurgery Manuel Velasco Suárez. This work is licensed under an Open Access Creative Commons Attribu-
tion-NonCommercial 4.0 International (CC BY-NC 4.0) license that allows use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided that the original work is 
correctly cited. Commercial reuse is not allowed.”
Doi: 10.31157/an.v28i2.432
Saucedo-Uribe Erasmo1,2,3 ✉|González-Mallozzi Pedro Jehu1,2 | Medrano-Garza Raúl Ricardo1,2 |Díaz 
González-Colmenero Fernando1,3 | Carranza-Navarro Farid1,2 | Castillo-Morales Patricia Lizeth1,3 | Leyva-
Camacho Paloma C.1,3 | Herrera-Montemayor Yessica1,2  | Vidal-Tijerina Mauricio1,2 | Enríquez-Navarro 
Moisés Karika1,2 | Medrano Samantha B.1,3 | Fernández-Zambrano Stefan Mauricio1 | Mancías- Guerra 
Claudia Magdalena2 | Saucedo-Mancías Claudia Lizeth2 | Sánchez-Ramírez Manuel Ramiro2
1. Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of 
Medicine, Universidad Autonoma de 
Nuevo Leon (UANL). Mexico.
2. Advanced 
Neuroscience 
Center 
Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo 
Leon (UANL). Mexico.
3. INVEST Medicina UANL-KER Unit 
Mayo Clinic (KER Unit Mexico), 
Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo 
Leon, México.
Correspondence
Erasmo Saucedo Uribe 
Faculty 
of 
Medicine, 
Universidad 
Autónoma de Nuevo Leon (UANL), Av. 
Francisco I. Madero and Av. Gonza-
litos, Col. Mitras Centro, Monterrey, 
Nuevo León, México. C.P 64460
✉ drerasmosaucedouribe@gmail.com 
COMPARATIVE EFFICACY OF FIRST AND SECOND 
GENERATION LONG-ACTING INJECTABLE ANTIPSYCHOTIC 
IN SCHIZOPHRENIC PATIENTS: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW 
AND NETWORK META-ANALYSIS
Abstract
Introduction: Long-acting injectable antipsychotics (LAIA) can influence the course of treatment and 
have the potential to improve treatment adherence. This systematic review and network meta-analysis 
aimed to evaluate the efficacy of second-generation LAIAs (SG-LAIAs) and first-generation LAIAs 
(FG-LAIAs) in the treatment of schizophrenia. Methods: The present study adheres to the Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines and is registered in 
Prospero (ID CRD42019128700). A comprehensive search was conducted in Medline, Embase, Web 
of Science, and Scopus databases. The search encompassed the period from June 17, 2020, with 
an update from June 2020 until September 14, 2021. Results: The standardized mean differences 
(SMDs) for four antipsychotics (80%) demonstrated significant reductions in PANSS scores compared 
to the placebo. The SMDs ranged from -0.72 (95% CrI -0.99 to -0.46) for haloperidol to -0.45 
(-0.54 to -0.37) for paliperidone. Eight studies provided usable results for both negative and positive 
symptoms, involving a comparison of four antipsychotics. The SMDs for three antipsychotics (75%) 
significantly reduced negative symptoms compared to placebo, ranging from -0.40 (95% CrI -0.53 
to -0.26) for aripiprazole to -0.32 (-0.44 to -0.19) for risperidone. The SMDs for the three drugs 
(100%) that significantly reduced positive symptoms compared to placebo ranged from -0.50 (95% CrI 
-0.63 to -0.37) for aripiprazole to -0.19 (-0.57 to 0.20) for zuclopenthixol. Discussion: Our findings 
suggest that all long-acting injectable antipsychotics, except for zuclopenthixol, exhibit comparable 
efficacy in symptom reduction. Conclusions: The majority of LAIAs demonstrate similar effectiveness in 
reducing overall symptoms, and the differences between individual LAIAs are not statistically significant.
Keywords: Schizophrenia, antipsychotics, long-acting injectable antipsychotics
Arch Neurocien (Mex) 
Comparative efficacy of first and second generation long-acting injectable antipsychotic in schizophrenic 
patients: a systematic review and network meta-analysis
36  | archivosdeneurociencias.org 
 Volume 28, number 2, year 2023
Introduction
Schizophrenia, a severe chronic disorder, affects more than 
21 million people worldwide1,2 It has been recognized as a 
crucial mental health concern within the Grand Challenges 
in Global Mental Health Initiative.3–6 The diagnosis of 
schizophrenia profoundly impacts life expectancy, with mortality 
rates increasing 2-3 times among younger individuals.7 
Long-acting injectable antipsychotics (LAIA) have the 
potential to lead the course for schizophrenia treatment 
and to increase adherence, as well as reduce healthcare 
costs in the long term. Additionally, LAIAs have been 
associated with a lower risk of all-cause mortality, relapses, 
and hospitalizations compared to other antipsychotics.8–11
However, the question of LAIA efficacy in the treatment 
of schizophrenia remains uncertain. Previous systematic 
reviews comparing second-generation (SG) and first-
generation (FG) LAIAs have primarily focused on mortality 
risk12 or discontinuation rates.13 Only one meta-analysis 
conducted by our research group14 has specifically 
addressed efficacy and tolerability; nevertheless, results 
are considered preliminary due to the lack of evidence.
Considering the critical role of depot antipsychotics for 
long-term symptom stability, we performed a systematic 
review and network meta-analysis of randomized clinical 
trials (RCT) of patients with diagnosis of schizophrenia 
who are at least 18 years old with a minimum >12 
weeks of treatment, in which SGA-LAIs were compared 
to FG-LAIs or placebo, to evaluate efficacy through 
clinimetry (PANSS global score, PANSS Positive subscale, 
and PANSS Negative subscale) and clinical criteria.
Methods 
Search strategy and selection criteria
This network meta-analysis adheres to the guidelines 
outlined in the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) (the PRISMA checklist 
is available in the supplementary material). The protocol for 
this study was registered in PROSPERO under the registration 
number 
CRD42019128700. 
An 
experienced 
librarian 
(EG), in collaboration with the lead researcher, developed 
and implemented the search strategy across multiple 
databases, including Medline, Embase, Web of Science, 
and Scopus, from database inception to June 17, 2020, 
with an update from June 2020 to September 14, 2021. 
Additionally, references from eligible studies and reviews 
were also screened for eligibility (search can be found in 
supplementary material Table 1).
To be included in this systematic review and network meta-
analysis, studies were required to be randomized controlled 
trials (RCTs) investigating depot antipsychotics, both typical 
(first generation) and atypical (second generation), comparing 
them with each other, or placebo, and that also meet the 
following criteria: A) Inclusion of patients aged 18 years or 
older with a confirmed diagnosis of schizophrenia based 
on recognized diagnostic criteria, such as the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) or the 
International Classification of Diseases 10th Edition (ICD-10); 
B) Evaluation of depot antipsychotics efficacy measured by 
various scales, including the Positive and Negative Symptoms 
Scale (PANSS), the Clinical Global Impression (CGI), the Brief 
Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS), as well as assessments of the 
quality of life, treatment adherence, suicide risk, aggressiveness, 
relapse, and rehospitalization; and C) Minimum treatment 
duration of ≥12 weeks. Studies were eligible for inclusion 
if they compared one LAIA treatment with another or with a 
placebo. Studies were excluded if they were nonrandomized 
clinical 
trials, 
involved 
patients 
with 
treatment-resistant 
schizophrenia or with a diagnosis other than schizophrenia, 
treatment durations of less than 12 weeks, or comparisons 
with oral antipsychotics or other psychotropic medications; 
studies not measuring efficacy were also not considered.
Three pairs of investigators (ESU, AFG, FCM, PLCM, RM, 
and PJGM) independently selected the studies, reviewed the 
primary reports and supplementary materials, extracted the 
relevant information from the included trials, and assessed 
the risk of bias. Before each screening phase, pilots were 
conducted to ensure satisfactory inter-rater reliability, with 
a Fleiss' kappa value exceeding 0.70.15 Any discrepancies 
were resolved through consensus and arbitration by a panel 
of investigators within the review team (FCN and PLCM).
Outcomes of interest and data extraction
A web-based extraction form was developed and 
evaluated by all reviewers before data extraction. General 
information from the included studies (author names, 
publication year, country of origin, funding sources, 
and study design) was extracted. The primary efficacy 
outcome of interest was symptoms, assessed by changes 
in the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) 
total score. The PANSS score was chosen as the primary 
measure due to its utility in defining symptom severity.16,17 
Arch Neurocien (Mex) 
Saucedo-Uribe E  et al.
 Volume 28, number 2, year 2023
archivosdeneurociencias.org |  37
Secondary 
efficacy 
outcomes 
encompassed 
changes 
in 
the 
PANSS 
Positive 
and 
Negative 
subscales.
Data analysis
Effect sizes for each treatment comparison reported in the 
included studies were estimated with odds ratios (OR). 
Subsequently, frequentist network meta-analysis models were 
constructed to examine the primary and secondary efficacy 
outcomes, with placebo serving as the reference group in all 
models.
Pairwise meta-analytical techniques were employed to 
estimate effect sizes based on the mean changes in the 
PANSS score reported in each study. If the degree of statistical 
heterogeneity was considerable (i.e., an I2 statistic >50%), 
both random and fixed effects models were explored. 
In cases of a significant Q test for heterogeneity, the random 
effects results were utilized.
In the network meta-analysis models, both random effects 
and fixed effects models were considered. The assumption 
of transitivity was assessed using network graphs containing 
at least one closed loop; inconsistency within the models 
was evaluated through the Q statistics and the netsplit 
techniques (i.e., comparing the difference between indirect 
and direct estimates in closed loops within the network 
graph). If a significant level of inconsistency was detected, 
the results from the random effects model were reported. 
Treatment comparisons without direct estimates did not allow 
for the assessment of inconsistency. Treatment ranking was 
conducted using the P-score technique, and the results were 
presented in a forest plot that depicted the pooled effect sizes 
of each treatment estimated using the network meta-analysis.
A significance level of p <0.10 was considered indicative of 
statistical significance for all analyses of heterogeneity and 
inconsistency. For all other analyses, a threshold of p <0.05 
was considered. Data analysis was performed using the R 
software (version 4.1.2), in conjunction with RStudio (version 
2022.02.03+492) and the following packages: “meta”, 
“netmeta”, and “dmetar”.
Risk of bias 
The risk of bias in the included studies was assessed following 
the guidelines outlined in the Cochrane Handbook for 
Systematic Reviews of Interventions.18 Two independent 
reviewers (RM, SM), working in duplicate, evaluated the risk 
of bias for each individual RCT using the Cochrane risk of bias 
tool 2.0 (RoB2.0). This tool encompasses six domains, which 
include bias arising from the randomization process, deviations 
from the intended intervention, missing outcome data, 
mismeasurement of outcomes, and selection of reported results. 
According to the tool, the overall risk of bias for each study was 
classified as low, moderate (referred to as "with some concerns'' 
in the tool), or high.19 In the event of any discrepancies between 
the reviewers, resolution was achieved through consensus or, if 
necessary, by consulting a third reviewer.
GRADE assessment 
The certainty of the evidence for outcomes with significant 
clinical significance, such as PANSS, positive symptoms, and 
negative symptoms was assessed and categorized using the 
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, 
and Evaluation (GRADE).19 To determine the certainty of 
treatment effect estimates from the network meta-analysis, it 
was necessary to evaluate the level of evidence for both direct 
and indirect comparisons, as well as the best estimates derived 
from both direct and indirect evidence, including the network 
meta-analysis (combining direct and indirect evidence).20 The 
quality of evidence was classified as high, moderate, low, 
or very low, reflecting the certainty of the evidence for the 
meta-analysis.
Results
The initial search included a total of 6,525 citations, from 
which 5,658 unique reports were identified. After screening 
the titles and abstracts, 215 full-text articles were retrieved, 
resulting in 17 studies with a total of 7,139 participants. 
An additional search update was conducted from June 2020 
to September 14, 2021, which identified 184 citations; only 
26 articles were selected for full-text assessment, however, 
no articles met the inclusion criteria. The PRISMA flowchart 
depicting the study selection process, including reasons 
for exclusion, can be found in the Supplementary Material. 
Among the 17 included studies, the treatment groups consisted 
of 7 studies using risperidone, 11 using paliperidone, 2 using 
aripiprazole, 1 using haloperidol, 1 using zuclopenthixol, 
and 10 placebo groups; with the most common comparison 
being between paliperidone and risperidone (5 studies).
Network Plot
Figure 1 shows the network plots, where nodes and edges 
represent the different LAIAs treatments, comparisons, and 
placebo. Overall, a well-connected network was observed. 
The examined comparisons focused on PANSS score and its 
Arch Neurocien (Mex) 
Comparative efficacy of first and second generation long-acting injectable antipsychotic in schizophrenic 
patients: a systematic review and network meta-analysis
38  | archivosdeneurociencias.org 
 Volume 28, number 2, year 2023
Positive, and Negative symptoms subscales as reference as the 
primary efficacy outcome; secondary outcomes as results can be 
appreciated between various LAIA treatments and placebo. 
The most frequently examined comparisons in terms of PANSS 
score were between paliperidone vs. risperidone, as well as 
paliperidone vs. placebo. On the other hand, there were fewer 
direct comparisons between zuclopenthixol or haloperidol 
compared to other treatments. 
Efficacy
Out of the 17 included studies, 15 reported usable results for 
PANSS score involving the comparison of five antipsychotics. 
The remaining two studies were excluded from subsequent 
analyses due to inconsistency with the rest of the LAIA treatments 
or placebo studies. The SMDs for the four antipsychotics 
(80%) that significantly reduced PANSS score compared with 
placebo ranged from –0.72 (95% CrI –0.99 to –0.46) for 
haloperidol to –0.45 (–0.54 to –0.37) for paliperidone, 
as shown in Figure 2. In hierarchical order, haloperidol, 
aripiprazole, risperidone, and paliperidone demonstrated 
significantly greater reduction in PANSS score compared to 
other drugs, contrary to the belief that newer antipsychotics are 
more effective than older ones. However, it is worth mentioning 
that there was only one study comparing haloperidol with 
paliperidone using the overall PANSS scale, without specifically 
assessing the efficacy of haloperidol in reducing negative and 
positive symptoms, limiting the results. Further details of the 
direct and indirect comparisons are presented in Figure 3.
Eight out of 11 studies assessed for negative symptoms 
reported usable results (four antipsychotics compared). The 
most common comparisons were between paliperidone and 
placebo (4 studies), as well as paliperidone and risperidone 
(3 studies). The SMDs for three antipsychotics (75%) that 
significantly reduced negative symptoms compared to 
placebo ranged between –0.40 (95% CrI –0.53 to –0.26) 
for aripiprazole to –0.32 (–0.44 to –0.19) for risperidone 
as depicted in Figure 2. In hierarchical order, aripiprazole, 
paliperidone, and risperidone demonstrated a significant 
reduction in negative symptoms compared to other drugs. 
Among the antipsychotics examined for negative symptoms, 
zuclopenthixol was the only one that did not show improvement 
in the negative symptoms subscale when compared to 
risperidone. Additional information on the direct and indirect 
comparisons is presented in Figure 3.
For the reduction of positive symptoms, 8 out of 11 studies 
provided usable results (involving the comparison of four 
antipsychotics). Similar to the negative symptoms section, 
the most common comparisons were between paliperidone 
and risperidone (3 studies) and paliperidone and placebo 
(4 studies). The SMDs for the three drugs (100%) that 
significantly reduced positive symptoms compared to placebo 
ranged from –0.50 (95% CrI –0.63 to –0.37) for aripiprazole 
to –0.19 (–0.57 to 0.20) for zuclopenthixol, as shown in 
Figure 2. In hierarchical order, aripiprazole, paliperidone, and 
risperidone demonstrated a significant reduction in positive 
symptoms compared to other drugs. Further details of the 
direct and indirect comparisons can be found in Figure 3.
In terms of the primary outcome, typical antipsychotic 
haloperidol ranked first in reducing PANSS scores, which is 
considered a crucial and comprehensive measure of efficacy. 
As for the secondary outcomes, aripiprazole exhibited the most 
Figure 1. Network plot illustrating the meta-analysis results. A) PANSS total score, B) Negative symptoms score, C) Positive 
symptoms score.
Arch Neurocien (Mex) 
Saucedo-Uribe E  et al.
 Volume 28, number 2, year 2023
archivosdeneurociencias.org |  39
Figure 2. Treatment ranking based on the network meta-analysis of all trials. A) PANSS total score, B) Negative symptoms score, 
C) Positive symptoms score. 
Note: Placebo serves as the reference group in both efficacy plots. SMD: standardized mean difference, OR: overall risk, Arip: 
ariperidone, Hal: haloperidol, Pal: paliperidone, Pcb: placebo, Risp: risperidone, Zuc:  zuperidone, Flph:  flupenthixol.
Figure 3. Direct and indirect comparisons in the network meta-analysis of all efficacy trials. 
Note: The diagonal represents the various long-active injectable antipsychotics examined in the study. On the left side of the 
diagonal, effect sizes are presented as standardized mean difference (SMD) with corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) 
and 95% prediction intervals, with each cell indicating values for a specific comparison between the LAIAs. On the right side of 
the diagonal, efficacy values are presented as relative risk (RR) with 95% CIs and 95% prediction intervals. Statistically significant 
data are shown in bold.
Arch Neurocien (Mex) 
Comparative efficacy of first and second generation long-acting injectable antipsychotic in schizophrenic 
patients: a systematic review and network meta-analysis
40  | archivosdeneurociencias.org 
 Volume 28, number 2, year 2023
significant reductions in positive and negative symptoms and 
ranked second, following haloperidol, regarding PANSS score 
reduction. These findings indicate that one typical and one 
atypical antipsychotic emerged as leading treatments in terms 
of efficacy outcomes. These results are considered because 
the internal consistency of the network meta-analysis of these 
outcomes could be evaluated, and statistically significant 
differences were observed. 
Discussion
In this network meta-analysis involving 17 studies and 7139 
participants, we evaluated the comparative efficacy of eight 
different long-acting injectable antipsychotics and placebo 
in the treatment of schizophrenia. This study builds upon 
previous findings from pairwise meta-analyses that compared 
first versus second-generation LAIAs and examined various 
outcomes assessed by clinician-administered rating scales, 
such as positive and negative symptoms.
Our results indicate that, with the exception of zuclopenthixol, 
all LAIAs were more effective than placebo in reducing overall 
PANSS scores. The SMD ranged from –0.72 for haloperidol 
decanoate to –0.45 for paliperidone palmitate. However, these 
findings also suggest that the differences between individual LAIAs 
are not statistically significant. In our previous meta-analysis, we 
found that first and second-generation LAIAs had similar efficacy 
in reducing general psychopathology, although only three studies 
were included. The overlapping confidence intervals in this 
network meta-analysis further support the notion that most LAIAs 
have similar effectiveness in reducing overall symptoms, including 
haloperidol decanoate. Although node splitting assessment 
revealed no inconsistencies, only one study included haloperidol 
LAIA, which may limit the generalizability of these findings.
For positive and negative symptoms, the available data 
primarily originated from studies involving newer LAIAs such as 
paliperidone palmitate, aripiprazole, lauroxil, and risperidone 
microspheres, with all LAIAs exhibiting a similar effect in reducing 
these symptom dimensions. Even though this statement may 
hold true for the positive dimension, the evaluation of negative 
symptoms in the clinical trials included was based on the PANSS 
negative symptoms subscale, which does not differentiate 
between primary and secondary negative symptoms.21 
Therefore, it remains unclear whether the improvements 
observed in these core symptoms with LAIAs are directly 
related to their actions on the primary biochemical deficits in 
schizophrenia or if they are mediated through other mechanisms.
Regarding zuclopenthixol LAIA, it is worth noting that the 
presence of comorbid substance use disorder in the studied 
population may alter the homogeneity of the sample, 
potentially explaining the observed differences with other LAIAs.
Results obtained from the previous analyses suggest that 
older, less expensive LAIAs such as haloperidol decanoate 
exhibit comparable efficacy to second-generation LAIAs 
(aripiprazole, lauroxil, paliperidone palmitate, risperidone 
microspheres). However, only aripiprazole lauroxil (OR 0.2), 
risperidone microspheres (0.26), and paliperidone palmitate 
(0.39) demonstrated a significantly lower odds ratio (OR) for 
psychotic exacerbation. While clinician-administered rating 
scale improvements were commonly used as primary outcome 
measures in the included RCTs, relapse, and exacerbations are 
more frequently employed in clinical practice. Discrepancies 
in the criteria used across studies often prioritize the focus on 
rating scales, which may explain some differences observed 
between the PANSS mean changes and other outcomes.
Although the main focus of this manuscript is the efficacy 
of LAI´s antipsychotics, our protocol also encompasses 
data on safety and tolerability. Due to the heterogeneous 
nature of these studies (inconsistency among studies and 
evaluation methods), a separate analysis and discussion 
of the information pertaining to efficacy were necessary.
We conducted a search for various safety variables, including 
treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs), serious treatment-
emergent adverse events (sTEAEs), extrapyramidal symptoms 
(EPS), use of antiparkinsonian drugs, clinically significant 
weight gain, suicide ideation, and attempts, pain at the 
injection site, discontinuation due to any cause, discontinuation 
due to adverse effects, and discontinuation due to lack 
of efficacy. However, given the limited literature available 
on most of these variables, we were only able to provide a 
critical review of the literature for the following variables.
Nonetheless, we can discuss some of the results included in 
our protocol, considering the significant relevance of the safety 
aspect of antipsychotics, particularly given the prevalence 
of metabolic alterations and neurologic adverse events 
associated with this class of drugs.
Regarding TEAEs and sTEAEs, aripiprazole and risperidone 
demonstrated favorable outcomes when compared to placebo, 
respectively. However, aripiprazole exhibited a non-protective 
effect against sTEAEs.
Arch Neurocien (Mex) 
Saucedo-Uribe E  et al.
 Volume 28, number 2, year 2023
archivosdeneurociencias.org |  41
Only one study reported two deaths, with the majority of 
studies reporting a low incidence of mortality. Among LAIs, 
risperidone demonstrated the lowest mortality rate compared 
to placebo.
The all-cause discontinuation rate of LAIs indicated a 
protective effect for all treatments, except for haloperidol 
decanoate. Aripiprazole exhibited the highest rate of 
treatment continuation compared to placebo. Regarding 
discontinuation due to adverse events, aripiprazole had 
the lowest rate of treatment abandonment attributed to 
adverse events. Please refer to Figure 4 for detailed results.
In a meta-analysis conducted by our group,14 we aimed to 
assess safety aspects related to the use of LAIs. Despite the 
numerous variables we attempted to evaluate, measures 
were often reported using different methods, making it 
difficult to draw conclusions regarding these variables. 
However, indirect and direct comparisons allowed for some 
insights to be gained. Regarding extrapyramidal symptoms 
and tardive dyskinesia, SG-LAIs were more likely to be 
associated with these adverse events compared to placebo, 
although this did not impact treatment discontinuation.
The metabolic profile of LAIs was evaluated in only one study 
that conducted a metabolic assessment including measures of 
glucose, HbA1c%, and lipid profile over a 24-month period.22 
This 
study 
compared 
haloperidol 
decanoate 
and 
paliperidone 
palmitate, 
with 
no 
differences 
observed 
within this comparison. These findings are of great interest, 
as SGA-LAIs are associated with metabolic parameters 
increase. However, SGA-LAIs were associated with weight 
gain and increased body mass index during long-term use.
Another study comparing paliperidone palmitate at different 
dosages (50mg, 100mg, and 150mg) versus placebo over a 
three-month period in acutely ill patients with schizophrenia 
evaluated safety outcomes. The overall incidence of 
TEAEs did not differ significantly between the groups. 
The frequency of extrapyramidal symptoms and glucose 
increase as TEAEs was low. However, clinically significant 
weight gain was more frequently observed in the paliperidone 
palmitate group (12% for 50 mg, 10% for 100 mg, 4% 
for 150 mg) compared to the placebo group (2%).23
A study comparing paliperidone palmitate (at dosages 
of 50mg, 100mg, and 150mg) and risperidone LAI (at 
dosages of 25mg, 37.5mg, and 50mg) over a 13-week 
period, assessing safety through TEAEs, clinical laboratory 
findings, EPS, electrocardiogram findings, and physical 
examination findings, found no significant differences 
between the two groups, with no new findings compared 
to previous studies.24
Figure 4. Safety outcomes. A) Treatment Emergent Adverse Events (TEAEs), B) Serious Treatment Emergent Adverse Events 
(STEAEs), C) Deaths, D) All-cause discontinuation, E) Discontinuation due to adverse events.
Arch Neurocien (Mex) 
Comparative efficacy of first and second generation long-acting injectable antipsychotic in schizophrenic 
patients: a systematic review and network meta-analysis
42  | archivosdeneurociencias.org 
 Volume 28, number 2, year 2023
Strengths and limitations
To the best of our knowledge, this network meta-analysis 
represents the first attempt to compare the efficacy of first 
and second-generation long-acting injectable antipsychotics 
(LAIAs) and placebo in the treatment of schizophrenia. Previous 
meta-analyses in this area have primarily focused on mortality 
risk or discontinuation rates, without considering evidence 
regarding efficacy.
Overall, our analysis revealed no evidence of network 
inconsistency, while the risk of bias ranged from low to 
moderate across the included studies. The quality of evidence 
varied from very low to high. Detailed results pertaining to the 
risk of bias and the GRADE assessment can be found in the 
supplementary material.
When interpreting our findings, several limitations should be 
taken into account. We were unable to examine all variables 
that previous studies have identified as potentially influencing 
the efficacy of LAIAs, such as discontinuation rates, mortality, 
or adverse events. Our focus was specifically on assessing 
efficacy based on PANSS scores within the included trials, 
aiming for precision. However, we have identified other 
variables that may be worthwhile to explore in future research. 
Lastly, it should be noted that unpublished studies were not 
included in our analysis.
Conclusions
Clinical 
practice 
guidelines 
recommend 
individualized 
antipsychotic selection based on side effect profiles. The 
distinct pharmacokinetics of oral and depot antipsychotics 
pose challenges in managing adverse events, necessitating 
careful consideration before drug selection. In terms of PANSS 
scores, all LAIAs demonstrated similar performance compared 
to the placebo.
References
1. Brown A, Lau F. Chapter 2 - A review of the epidemiology of 
schizophrenia. Handb Behav Neurosci. 2016;23:17-30. 
2. World Health Organization. Schizophrenia. https://www.who.
int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/schizophrenia
3. Collins PY, Patel V, Joestl SS, March D, Insel TR, Daar AS, et 
al. Grand challenges in global mental health. Nature. 2011, 
475:7-10. 
4. Karadag F, Sengul CB, Enli Y, Karakulah K, Alacam H, Kaptanoglu 
B et al. Relationship between serum bilirubin levels and metabolic 
syndrome in patients with schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Clin 
Psychopharmacol Neurosci. 2017;15(2):153-62. 
5. Kim YK, Choi J, Park SC. A novel bio-psychosocial-behavioral 
treatment model in schizophrenia. Int J Mol Sci. 2017;18(4):734. 
6. Tripathi A, Kar SK, Shukla R. Cognitive deficits in schizophrenia: 
Understanding the biological correlates and remediation 
strategies. Clin Psychopharmacol Neurosci. 2018;16(1):7-17. 
7. Chesney E, Goodwin G, Fazel S. Risks of all-cause and suicide 
mortality in mental disorders: a meta-review. World Psychiatry. 
2014;13(2):153-60. 
8. Barkhof E, Meijer CJ, de Sonneville LMJ, Linszen DH, de Haan L. 
Interventions to improve adherence to antipsychotic medication 
in patients with schizophrenia-A review of the past decade. 
Eur Psychiatry [Internet]. 2012;27(1):9-18. doi: 10.1016/j.
eurpsy.2011.02.005
9. Kishimoto T, Nitta M, Borenstein M, Kane JM, Correll CU. Long-
acting injectable versus oral antipsychotics in schizophrenia: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis of mirror-image studies. J 
Clin Psychiatry. 2013;74(10):957-65. 
10. Leucht C, Heres S, Kane J, Kissling W, Davis J, Leucht S. Oral 
versus depot antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia--a critical 
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised long-term 
trials. Schizophr Res. 2011; 127(1-3):83-92. 
11. Park SC, Choi MY, Choi J, Park E, Tchoe HJ, Suh JK, et al. 
Comparative efficacy and safety of long-acting injectable and 
oral second-generation antipsychotics for the treatment of 
schizophrenia: A systematic review and meta-Analysis. Clin 
Psychopharmacol Neurosci. 2018; 16(4):361-75. 
12. Kishi T, Matsunaga S, Iwata N. Mortality risk associated with 
long-acting injectable antipsychotics: A systematic review and 
meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials. Schizophr Bull. 
2016; 42(6):1438-45. 
13. Gentile S. Discontinuation rates during long-term, second-
generation antipsychotic long-acting injection treatment: A 
systematic review. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2019;73(5):216-30. 
14. Saucedo E, Carranza F, Fernanda A, Medrano G, Iscely 
K, Cervantes G, et al. Preliminary efficacy and tolerability 
profiles of first versus second-generation long-acting injectable 
antipsychotics in schizophrenia : A systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Psychiatr Res. 2020; 129:222-33. 
15. Falotico R, Quatto P. Fleiss’ kappa statistic without paradoxes. 
Qual Quant. 2015; 49:463-70. 
16. Leucht S, Davis JM, Engel RR, Kissling W, Kane JM. Definitions 
of response and remission in schizophrenia: Recommendations 
for their use and their presentation. Acta Psychiatr Scand Suppl. 
2009; (438):7-14. 
17. Schennach-Wolff R, Seemüller FH, Mayr A, Maier W, Klingberg 
S, Heuser I, et al. An early improvement threshold to predict 
response and remission in first-episode schizophrenia. Br J 
Psychiatry. 2010;196(6):460-6. 
18. Higgins JPT, Thomas J, Chandler J, Cumpston M, Li T, Page MJ, 
et al., editors. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of 
Interventions version 6.0 (updated July 2019). Cochrane; 2019. 
Arch Neurocien (Mex) 
Saucedo-Uribe E  et al.
 Volume 28, number 2, year 2023
archivosdeneurociencias.org |  43
www.training.cochrane.org/handbook
19. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, Kunz R, Falck-Ytter Y, Alonso-Coello P, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of 
evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ. 2008;336(7650):924-6. doi: 10.1136/bmj.39489.470347.AD.
20. Puhan MA, Murad MH, Li T, Singh JA, Kessels AG, Guyatt GH, et al. A GRADE Working Group approach for rating the quality of treatment 
effect estimates from network meta-analysis. BMJ. 2014;349:g5630:1-10. doi: 10.1136/bmj.g5630
21. Marder SR, Kirkpatrick B. Defining and measuring negative symptoms of schizophrenia in clinical trials. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 
[Internet. 2014;24(5):737-43. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2013.10.016
22. McEvoy JP, Byerly M, Hamer RM, Dominik R, Swartz MS, Rosenheck RA, et al. Effectiveness of paliperidone palmitate vs haloperidol 
decanoate for maintenance treatment of schizophrenia: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA - J Am Med Assoc. 2014; 311(19):1978-86. 
23. Gopal S, Hough DW, Xu H, Lull JM, Gassmann-Mayer C, Remmerie BM, et al. Efficacy and safety of paliperidone palmitate in adult patients 
with acutely symptomatic schizophrenia: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-response study. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 
2010;25(5):247-56. 
24. Pandina G, Lane R, Gopal S, Gassmann-Mayer C, Hough D, Remmerie B, et al. A double-blind study of paliperidone palmitate and 
risperidone long-acting injectable in adults with schizophrenia. Prog Neuro-Psychopharmacology Biol Psychiatry. 2011; 35(1):218-26. 
doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.11.008
© Instituto Nacional de Neurología y Neurocirugía 
Manuel Velasco Suárez

