Citation: Zhu, Y.; Kim, M.; Curtis, D.;
Wang, J.; Le, O.; Fried, D. Active
Surveillance of Root Caries in Vivo
with CP-OCT. Diagnostics 2023, 13,
465. https://doi.org/10.3390/
diagnostics13030465
Academic Editor: Fabiano Bini
Received: 2 November 2022
Revised: 19 January 2023
Accepted: 21 January 2023
Published: 27 January 2023
Copyright:
© 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
diagnostics
Article
Active Surveillance of Root Caries in Vivo with CP-OCT
Yihua Zhu, Minyoung Kim
, Donald Curtis, Jing Wang, Oanh Le and Daniel Fried *
Department of Preventive and Restorative Dental Sciences, University of California, San Francisco,
707 Parnassus Ave, San Francisco, CA 9414, USA
* Correspondence: daniel.fried@ucsf.edu
Abstract: The active surveillance of root caries lesions to monitor potential remineralization or
decay progression is challenging for the clinician, due to unreliable diagnostic information. The
conventional visual and tactile methods for assessing the lesion activity are not reliable, and the
clinician is often unable to determine if the lesion is progressing or has been arrested. An important
marker of an arrested lesion is a highly mineralized transparent surface zone (TSL) that forms when
the mineral is deposited in the outer layer of the lesion. The purpose of this study was to determine if
cross-polarization optical coherence tomography (CP-OCT) could be used to detect changes in the
lesion severity and activity during active monitoring. In total, 18 subjects with 22 suspected active root
caries lesions were evaluated using CP-OCT at the baseline, 3 months, and 6 months. All subjects were
instructed to use a high ﬂuoride dentifrice at the baseline. The results showed that CP-OCT was able
to discriminate the active from the arrested lesions by identifying the presence of a TSL on arrested
lesions. The results also indicated that the mean TSL thickness increased signiﬁcantly (p < 0.05) for
the nine lesion areas. In addition, CP-OCT was able to show the progression of demineralization,
erosion, and changes in gingival contours in scanned areas. CP-OCT was valuable for monitoring the
activity and severity of root caries lesions in vivo. CP-OCT can be used to assess the activity of root
caries lesions at a single time point by detecting the presence of a TSL at the lesion surface indicative
of the lesion arrest.
Keywords: root caries; optical coherence tomography; lesion activity; non-surgical intervention
1. Introduction
Root caries remains a clinical concern, especially in the elderly [1]. Their management
remains challenging because the clinical diagnosis of root caries is subjective and is based
on visual and tactile parameters. In contrast to coronal caries, root caries lack a valid
diagnostic standard, such as radiography [2]. Investigators have not developed a reliable
relationship between root caries’ appearance and activity [3,4]. Most experts agree that
active root lesions are soft, yet tactile hardness assessments remain subjective and lack
reliability [3]. Multifactorial root caries scoring systems have been developed with mixed
success [5,6]. The International Caries Detection and Assessment System (ICDAS) coor-
dinating committee proposed a system for assessing lesion activity [5,7]. Criteria include
color; texture (smooth, rough); appearance (shiny, dull); tactile (soft, leathery, hard); loss
of anatomical contour; and proximity to the gingival margin [8,9]. Histological analyses
for lesion assessment, such as microradiography, requires the destruction of the tooth and
are not suitable for use in vivo. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is a noninvasive
technique for creating cross-sectional images of the internal biological structure and is
well-suited for imaging coronal and root surfaces in vivo [10–12]. Polarization sensitivity
has proven to be valuable for enhancing the contrast of demineralization, reducing the
strong specular reﬂection from tooth surfaces, and measuring birefringence [13–15]. Studies
have demonstrated that CP-OCT can be used to quantify the loss of cementum and the
severity of the demineralization on root surfaces [16,17]. OCT can be used to discriminate
between non-carious cervical lesions and root caries in vivo [18]. Importantly, CP-OCT
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 465. https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13030465
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/diagnostics
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 465
2 of 12
can be used to monitor the formation of a highly mineralized transparent surface layer
(TSL) on demineralized dentin after exposure to a remineralization solution [17,19]. The
optical changes associated with the lesion dehydration have been investigated via thermal,
ﬂuorescence, and SWIR imaging for lesions on enamel surfaces [20–24]. Thermal imaging
during the lesion dehydration has been used to measure the lesion permeability [19,25–27].
Decreased thermal emission from the lesion surface is indicative of reduced permeability
and a drying rate that is consistent with an arrested lesion. During drying, lesion areas will
cool due to the loss of water from porous areas and from the collapsed and unsupported
collagen matrix of the demineralized cementum and dentin. Arrested lesions have min-
eral ﬁlling the pores at the lesion surface due to the remineralization and the formation
of a TSL, which inhibits water diffusion and permeability, resulting in less temperature
change and shrinkage during drying. Lesions with a TSL have signiﬁcantly lower thermal
emission [19,25–28].
In a recent study, CP-OCT and thermal imaging were used to assess the activity of root
caries lesions on 30 test subjects [27]. In that study, CP-OCT was used to measure the lesion
structure and the presence of TSL formation indicative of arrested lesions at a single time
point. The activity of those lesions was conﬁrmed with thermal imaging. The next step
is to consider if CP-OCT can detect changes in the lesion activity over time during active
monitoring. The purpose of this study was to monitor root caries lesions over a period
of 6 months to determine if CP-OCT could be used to detect changes in lesion severity
and activity. Subjects with root caries lesions that were clinically diagnosed as active were
prescribed a high ﬂuoride dentifrice and monitored from baseline to 6 months.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Participant Recruitment and Procedures
Thirty test subjects at the UCSF comprehensive clinics were recruited for this study
with approval from the Human Protection Program Institutional Review Board of the
University of California, San Francisco (IRB#18-24558, Approval Date: 27 March 2018).
This study was a single-site longitudinal observational clinical study. Test subjects were
aged 18–90 and had one root caries lesion that was diagnosed as active based on a visual
and tactile assessment by an experienced clinician using the ICDAS II root caries lesion
activity criteria [7]. Test subjects were prescribed and instructed to use a high ﬂuoride
(5000 ppm) dentifrice, Prevident 5000 Plus (Colgate, NY, USA). Test subjects were imaged
at baseline, 3 months, and 6 months with CP-OCT after beginning brushing with a high
ﬂuoride toothpaste. Color images were acquired at the baseline and 6 months using a
FocusDent MD740 (Vilnius, Lithuania) 1280 × 960-pixel intraoral camera. The sample size
of 30 was based on an in vitro study of the remineralization of simulated dentin lesions,
with the mean transparent surface layer (TSL) thickness increased from 0 to 53.8 ± 13.3 µm
after 12 days of remineralization [19]. Therefore, based on an average SD of 6.65 µm for the
TSL thickness with a two-sided signiﬁcance level of 0.05, a study with 30 subjects would
have a 90% power to detect an increase in the TSL thickness of 5.7 µm.
2.2. Cross-Polarization Optical Coherence Tomography (CP-OCT)
The cross-polarization OCT system used for this study was the Model IVS-3000-
CP, purchased from Santec (Komaki, Aichi, Japan). This system acquires only the cross-
polarization image (CP-OCT), not the simultaneous cross and co-polarization images
(PS-OCT). This is a 3D system with a right-angle dental handpiece capable of acquiring
complete tomographic images of a volume of 6 × 6 × 7 mm in approximately 3 s. This
system has been used for multiple in vivo caries imaging studies [29–31]. It operates at a
wavelength of 1321 nm and a bandwidth of 111 nm, with a measured resolution in the air
of 11.4 µm.
An attachment with an internal air nozzle made of autoclavable Dental-SG resin was
printed using a Formlabs 3D printer (Somerville, MA, USA) and attached to the OCT
scanning handpiece. The air at 10 psi was connected to the probe to prevent the fogging of
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 465
3 of 12
the imaging window and to dry the tooth surface. Images were acquired after drying for 30
s. Images of the CP-OCT handpiece are shown with and without the 3D printed attachment
in Figure 1. The entire handpiece assembly was covered with polypropylene ﬁlm for
infection control prior to the imaging, as shown in Figure 1. Entire (3D) CP-OCT cross-
polarization images of each lesion were acquired at each of the three timepoints. Image
preprocessing was applied using ORS Dragonﬂy (Montreal, QC, Canada) to despeckle and
smooth the images before image registration [32,33]. Image segmentation was performed
with 90% intensity thresholding, followed by the application of a 3D median ﬁlter with a
kernel size 3 for noise reduction and smoothing, while preserving the potential transparent
surface layer (TSL). Image registration was ﬁrst performed using manual rotation and
translation to achieve an initial rough alignment. It was followed by the application of ORS
Dragonﬂy’s automatic image registration function. It automatically tests the registration
by introducing miniature steps of rotation as small as 0.5 degrees and the translation of
1 voxel with a linear type of interpolation until the mobile image is superimposed to the
ﬁxed image. The alignment is assessed by the sum of squared differences (SSD) method. It
is important to note that OCT measures the optical path length and not the physical path
length, so some distortion is expected for images acquired at different angles.
Figure 1. (A) CP-OCT handpiece used for these studies, and (B) a closeup of the handpiece with the
added 3D printed attachment and covered by polypropylene wrap for infection control.
For quantitative measurements, rulers with a diameter of 100 µm were created in ORS
Dragonﬂy representing the respective intensity proﬁles orthogonal to the tooth surface at
positions in each lesion area. Positive TSL detection was conﬁrmed with two signiﬁcant
consecutive intensity peaks detected at the beginning of the ruler, and the TSL thickness
was measured as the distance between the two peaks. The lesion depth (Ld) was measured
as the overall length of the ruler’s non-zero intensity proﬁle. To prepare for the integrated
reﬂectivity (∆R) measurement, an intensity histogram of the cylindrical ruler was exported
from Dragonﬂy, and analyzed with a custom script written with MATLAB from Mathworks
(Natick, MA, USA) to identify the median intensity over the lesion depth that was later
used as an intensity normalization correction factor. Each OCT scan has a different intensity
proﬁle due to the variation in the angle and position of the imaging and other environmental
factors, so normalization was necessary for accurate ∆R comparison across all three co-
registered images. Furthermore, ∆R was then calculated as the sum of the intensity over
the lesion depth divided by the normalization correction factor.
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 465
4 of 12
3. Results
In this study, only 22 of the 30 test subjects initially recruited completed all three visits.
The COVID-19 pandemic greatly interfered with the study. Test subject visits at UCSF for
clinical studies considered nonessential for patient health were banned during part of the
pandemic. Images from 18 of the test subjects were successfully co-registered, while data
from 4 of the test subjects were discarded due to the inability to co-register the images at the
baseline, 3 months, and 6 months. Four subjects presented with both clinically appearing
active and arrested caries on the same tooth, based on the presence of a transparent surface
zone (TSL), so that twenty-two lesion areas were included for analysis from the 18 test
subjects. Eight of the lesion sites were arrested at the baseline, as shown by a visible TSL,
and only one active lesion became arrested during the 6 months of the study, according to
CP-OCT. Therefore, 9 of the 22 lesion sites had a measurable TSL at month 6, indicating
those lesion areas were arrested. Interestingly, many of the arrested lesions showed an
increase in the TSL thickness from baseline to 6 months. All the lesions were initially
classiﬁed as active lesions based on the clinical assessment and the multiple ICDAS II lesion
activity criteria. Of the 22 lesion sites analyzed, 8 were dark and 14 were light-colored at
the baseline, and 10 appeared rough and 12 appeared smooth. Digital images of the lesions
at the baseline and 6 months were shown to two clinicians after the completion of the study,
and they were asked to score the caries status and the activity of the lesions at the two time
points based on digital photographs. Table 1 is a contingency table comparing the caries
status (caries present or not present) and caries activity (active and arrested) assessed by
the visual examination of the images with CP-OCT assessment, in which the presence of a
TSL indicated the lesion was arrested, while the presence of demineralization without a
TSL indicated an active lesion. CP-OCT indicated that demineralization was present for all
lesion sites conﬁrming root caries presence.
Table 1. Contingency table comparing visual assessment of the digital images of the 22 lesion areas
to the CP-OCT images at baseline and at 6 months. The diagonal elements (bold) of the contingency
table show the number of visual assessments that match the CP-OCT analysis.
CP-OCT (Baseline)
CP-OCT (Month 6)
No
Lesion
Active
Lesion
Arrested
Lesion
Total
No
Lesion
Active
Lesion
Arrested
Lesion
Total
Visual
No Lesion
0
5
1
6
0
6
1
7
Active
Lesion
0
9
7
16
0
5
8
13
Arrested
Lesion
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
2
Total
0
14
8
22
0
13
9
22
At the baseline, 9 of the 14 active lesions were visually classiﬁed correctly, while none
of the 8 arrested lesions were correctly visually classiﬁed as arrested. At month 6, only
5 of the 13 active lesions were visually classiﬁed correctly, while none of the 9 arrested
lesions were correctly visually classiﬁed as arrested. The two lesions that were classiﬁed as
arrested by the clinicians at month 6 were shown to be active in CP-OCT images at month 6.
An example of an arrested lesion with minimal change after 6 months is shown in the
color and CP-OCT images of Figure 2. In the color images, the lesion area looks similar,
however, the exposed root surface appears to have decreased due to growth of the gingival
margin. A surface rendering (3D) of the entire CP-OCT scan taken at the baseline is also
shown, with the yellow line showing the position of the extracted CP-OCT b-scans. The
CP-OCT scan at the baseline shows the gingiva on the left and the exposed root surface
on the right. The lesion appears with a lesion body of higher intensity covered by a thin
transparent layer (dark zone) that indicates the TSL. The TSL has a very thin layer of higher
intensity that represents reﬂectance from the tooth surface. The lesion does not appear to
change in depth or severity after 6 months.
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 465
5 of 12
Figure 2. Color pictures at baseline and 6 months are shown for an arrested lesion. The dashed red
lines show the likely position of the three CP-OCT b-scans shown at baseline, 3 months, and 6 months.
The white dashed arrow in the OCT b-scan is directed from the root to the crown. A surface rendering
(3D) of the entire CP-OCT scan taken at baseline is also shown, with the yellow line showing the
position of the extracted b-scans. The position of the gingiva (G) and the lesion body (LB) with the
TSL located on top of the lesion are indicated. Little change has occurred for the lesion over 6 months.
A second lesion that is active with advancing cavitation is shown in Figure 3. In the
color image, a shadow is visible just above the exposed lesion area at the baseline and that
area is no longer visible at month 6. It is hard to determine from the color images whether
or not the lesion area is larger. The surface renderings of the CP-OCT scans that are shown
at the baseline and 6 months show that the area of cavitation is larger, and that the area
near the top of the lesion has collapsed. The CP-OCT scan at the baseline extracted at the
position of the yellow line shows the gingiva on the left and a cavitated lesion area on the
right, along with the mostly transparent sound enamel. A small lesion area (LB) is visible
just below the enamel, demarcated by the orange arrows. That lesion area between the
orange arrows becomes cavitated after 6 months in the lesion area. The depth lost was
measured to be 151 µm from 0–3 months and 296 µm from 3–6 months.
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 465
6 of 12
Figure 3. Color pictures at baseline and 6 months are shown for an active lesion with advancing
cavitation. The dashed red lines show the likely position of the three CP-OCT b-scans shown at
baseline, 3 months, and 6 months. The white dashed arrow in the OCT b-scan is directed from the
root to the crown. Surface renderings (3D) of the entire CP-OCT scans taken at baseline and 6 months
are also shown, with the yellow lines showing the position of the extracted b-scans. The position of
the gingiva (G) and enamel (E) along with the lesion body (LB) are indicated. After 6 months, the
demineralized area encompassing the lesion body between the two arrows has eroded, leaving a
cavitated region (CAV).
A third representative lesion that appears initially active at the baseline and appears to
become arrested at month 6 is shown in Figure 4. The color images show little change after
6 months. The CP-OCT b-scan at the baseline extracted at the position of the yellow line in
the CP-OCT surface rendering shows a highly reﬂective, slightly cavitated, active lesion
located between the enamel and the gingiva. In this scan, the gingiva is on the right and
the enamel is on the left. The lesion also extends into the enamel above the exposed root
surface. Between the baseline and month 6, the reﬂectivity of the lesion body decreases
from both the enamel and dentin lesion (exposed root) areas, and a distinct TSL forms over
the lesion.
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 465
7 of 12
Figure 4. Color pictures at baseline and 6 months are shown for an active lesion that has undergone
increasing remineralization and has a TSL after 6 months. The dashed red lines show the likely
position of the three CP-OCT b-scans shown at baseline, 3 months, and 6 months. The white dashed
arrow in the OCT b-scan is directed from the root to the crown. A surface rendering (3D) of the
entire CP-OCT scan taken at 0 months is also shown, with the yellow line showing the position of the
extracted b-scans. The position of the gingiva (G), enamel (E), and underlying dentin (D) are shown,
and the lesion body (LB) is indicated. After 6 months, the intensity of reﬂectivity from the lesion
body has decreased, and a distinct TSL is visible at the lesion surface.
A fourth lesion is shown in Figure 5. Color images show a large area of the exposed
root surface at baseline that becomes almost completely covered by inﬂamed gingiva after
6 months. CP-OCT surface renderings also shown at the baseline and 6 months show
dramatic hypertrophy of the gingival tissues. CP-OCT b-scans extracted at the position
of the yellow line show that the tooth is covered by a crown, and that there is an exposed
cavitated area of the root surface located between the gingival (left) and the crown (CR) on
the right, located between the two orange areas. The CP-OCT scan also shows that there is
some shallow demineralization on the exposed root surface, but it is localized and very
shallow. The month 3 and 6 CP-OCT scans show that the gingiva expands to cover much of
the exposed root surface, and that the lesion is much smaller at month 6. The lesion depth,
integrated reﬂectivity over the lesion depth (∆R), and the thickness of the transparent
surface zone if present (TSL) were measured from the co-registered CP-OCT scans. Values
were calculated for 22 lesion areas from 18 teeth, and the mean ± S.D. are plotted for all
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 465
8 of 12
three values in Figure 6. Both the mean lesion depth and the mean ∆R increased slightly
from the baseline to month 6, but the changes were not signiﬁcant (p > 0.05), n = 22. The
mean TSL thickness increased from the baseline to month 6, and the increase was signiﬁcant
(p < 0.05) for the nine lesion areas that showed measurable TSLs.
Figure 5. Color pictures at baseline and 6 months of an exposed root surface that becomes completely
covered by inﬂamed gingiva after 6 months. The dashed red lines show the likely position of the three
CP-OCT b-scans shown at baseline, 3 months, and 6 months. The white dashed arrow in the OCT
b-scan is directed from the root to the crown. Surface renderings (3D) of the entire CP-OCT scans
taken at baseline and 6 months are also shown, with the yellow lines showing the position of the
extracted b-scans. The position of the gingiva (G) and the attached crown (CR) are indicated. After
6 months, the exposed root surface indicated by the position between the two arrows has contracted
markedly and the 3D surface rendering shows most of the root surface that was exposed at baseline
is now covered by the expanded gingiva.
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 465
9 of 12
Figure 6. Bar graphs for mean ± S.D. for the CP-OCT measurements of the lesion depth, integrated
reﬂectivity over the lesion depth (∆R), and the TSL thickness. Bars of the same color are statistically
similar (p > 0.05). There were 22 samples for the lesion depth and ∆R, and 9 samples that had
measurable TSLs.
4. Discussion
The goal of this study was to demonstrate that CP-OCT could monitor changes in
the lesion activity and severity over time during active monitoring. We anticipated seeing
initially active lesions in the CP-OCT images with no TSLs at the baseline transition to
arrested lesions with TSLs at month 6. Unfortunately, only 1 of the 22 lesion sites exhibited
that ideal behavior. It is disappointing that most of the lesion sites did not improve with the
use of 1.1% NaF, however, it is important to point out that this study was not a clinical trial
on the remineralization performance of high ﬂuoride dentifrices, nor could we control the
compliance and hygiene of the participants. CP-OCT was able to show changes in many of
the lesions over time, and this study demonstrated that those lesion sites that appeared
initially arrested with the presence of a measurable TSL did not progress further in lesion
severity. Therefore, the presence of a measurable TSL present on the lesion in CP-OCT
images appears to be a key indicator that the lesion is arrested and did not progress during
the six-month study. CP-OCT detected the presence of a TSL in a single measurement
so lesion activity could be assessed at a single time point in vivo. The use of the highly
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 465
10 of 12
mineralized transparent surface zone as our “benchmark” for an arrested lesion surface
is supported by several in vitro and in vivo studies, and the histopathology of active vs.
arrested lesions [31,33,34]. Before the introduction of the optical coherence tomography,
a tooth had to be extracted, sectioned, and imaged with polarized light microscopy or
transverse microradiography to detect and measure the thickness of a transparent surface
zone [6,35]. Of those methods, only OCT can be used clinically.
In this study, CP-OCT was also able to monitor changes in the dimensions of the
gingival tissues. We did not anticipate that the gingiva in some patients would change
so dramatically in 6 months. For example, in Figure 5 the gingival margin appears to
advance more than a millimeter from the baseline to 6 months to nearly cover the pre-
viously exposed root surface. Such changes are challenging for the image registration
since the gingival margin cannot be used as a ﬁxed reference. Since active root lesions
are soft, considerable erosion is expected and CP-OCT was able to show that at multiple
sites, the demineralized dentin was preferentially eroded/abraded away over time. The
severity of the demineralization can be quantiﬁed using CP-OCT by the measurement
of the lesion depth and the integrated reﬂectivity over the lesion depth (∆R). However,
this approach is problematic when considerable erosion is present, as can be the case for
root lesions. For example, the lesion site in Figure 3 shows large drops in the lesion depth
and ∆R after 6 months. This is not due to remineralization but because the softer areas
of demineralization were likely abraded/eroded away. The mean lesion depth and ∆R
increased slightly over 6 months but neither increase was statistically signiﬁcant. However,
considering the inﬂuence of the erosion discussed above, it is likely that, with the exception
of the nine lesions that manifested a TSL at 6 months, most of the lesions progressed and
increased in severity.
This study and our prior study [27] further demonstrate that, not only is it difﬁcult to
visually assess the activity of root caries, but it is also difﬁcult to visually identify whether
or not demineralization is present on the exposed root surfaces, or if the lesion is actually
located on the root surface. The dentinal enamel junction (DEJ) and the cementum enamel
junction (CEJ) are easy to identify in OCT images, but are often very difﬁcult to visually
identify, particularly in lesion areas. For many of the lesions encountered in this study, the
location of demineralization in OCT images did not correspond to where it was anticipated
based on the lesion color and texture. Tactile assessments of root caries lesions are more
reliable, however, tactile assessments and aggressive probing with the explorer risks further
damage to lesion areas and the use of the sharp explorer is discouraged. It is also important
to note that OCT has limited access to subgingival lesion areas.
5. Conclusions
This was the ﬁrst clinical study to show that CP-OCT can be used to monitor changes
in lesion structure and activity over time during active monitoring. It demonstrates the
ability of CP-OCT to identify and monitor the activity of root caries in adults, and shows
the limitations of diagnosis by visual inspection, as compared to CP-OCT. CP-OCT imaging
has great potential for lesion activity assessment in a single visit. In addition, CP-OCT was
able to monitor the erosion of the root surface, loss of the cementum layer, changes in the
gingival tissues, and provide anatomic landmarks of the DEJ and CEJ. The therapeutic
relevance of the study is that it shows that CP-OCT can be used to monitor the efﬁcacy
of chemical intervention and can potentially be used in clinical trials to establish the
effectiveness of potential treatment options for root caries.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, D.C. and D.F.; methodology, D.C. and D.F.; test subject
recruitment, D.C., J.W. and O.L.; clinical imaging and data acquisition, Y.Z., D.C., J.W. and O.L.;
formal analysis, Y.Z. and M.K.; resources, D.F.; writing—original draft preparation, Y.Z., D.C. and D.F.;
writing—review and editing, Y.Z., D.C. and D.F.; project administration, D.F.; funding acquisition,
D.C. and D.F. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by NIDCR/NIH, grant number R01-DE027335.
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 465
11 of 12
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki, and approved by the Human Protection Program Institutional Review Board of the
University of California, San Francisco (IRB#18-24558, Approval Date: 27 March 2018).
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Cynthia Darling, Jacob Simon, and Nai-Yuan
Chang for their contributions to this work.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Dye, B.A.; Thornton-Evans, T.; Li, X.; Iafolla, T.J. Dental Caries and Tooth Loss in Adults in the United States, 2011–2012. In NCHS
Data Brief, #197; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Atlanta, GA, USA, 2015.
2.
Banting, D.W. Diagnosis of Root Caries. In NIH Consensus Statement; 18; National Institutes of Health: Bethesda, MD, USA, 2001;
pp. 1–24.
3.
Banting, D.W. Diagnosis and prediction of root caries. Adv. Dent. Res. 1993, 7, 80–86. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Schaeken, M.; Keltjens, H.; Van der Hoeven, J. Effects of ﬂuoride and chlorhexidine on the microﬂora of dental root surfaces and
progression of root-surface caries. J. Dent. Res. 1991, 70, 150–153. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Ekstrand, K.; Martignon, S.; Holm-Pedersen, P. Development and evaluation of two root caries controlling programmes for
home-based frail people older than 75 years. Gerodontology 2008, 25, 67–75. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Fejerskov, O.; Luan, W.M.; Nyvad, B.; Budtz-Jorgensen, E.; Holm-Pedersen, P. Active and inactive root surface caries lesions in a
selected group of 60- to 80-year-old Danes. Caries Res. 1991, 25, 385–391. [CrossRef]
7.
Ismail, A.I.; Sohn, W.; Tellez, M.; Amaya, A.; Sen, A.; Hasson, H.; Pitts, N.B. The International Caries Detection and Assessment
System (ICDAS): An integrated system for measuring dental caries. Community Dent. Oral Epidemiol. 2007, 35, 170–178. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
8.
Lynch, E.; Beighton, D. A comparison of primary root caries lesions classiﬁed according to colour. Caries Res. 1994, 28, 233–239.
[CrossRef]
9.
Pitts, N. (Ed.) Detection, Assessment, Diagnosis and Monitoring of Caries; Karger: Basel, Switzerland, 2009; Volume 21.
10.
Bouma, B.E.; Tearney, G.J. Handbook of Optical Coherence Tomography, 21 August 2002 ed.; Marcel Dekker: New York, NY, USA, 2002.
11.
Feldchtein, F.I.; Gelikonov, G.V.; Gelikonov, V.M.; Iksanov, R.R.; Kuranov, R.V.; Sergeev, A.M.; Gladkova, N.D.; Ourutina, M.N.;
Warren, J.A.; Reitze, D.H. In vivo OCT imaging of hard and soft tissue of the oral cavity. Opt. Express 1998, 3, 239–251. [CrossRef]
12.
Colston, B.; Everett, M.; Da Silva, L.; Otis, L.; Stroeve, P.; Nathel, H. Imaging of hard and soft tissue structure in the oral cavity by
optical coherence tomography. Appl. Opt. 1998, 37, 3582–3585. [CrossRef]
13.
Wang, X.J.; Zhang, J.Y.; Milner, T.E.; Boer, J.F.d.; Zhang, Y.; Pashley, D.H.; Nelson, J.S. Characterization of Dentin and Enamel by
use of Optical Coherence Tomography. Appl. Opt. 1999, 38, 586–590. [CrossRef]
14.
Baumgartner, A.; Dicht, S.; Hitzenberger, C.K.; Sattmann, H.; Robi, B.; Moritz, A.; Sperr, W.; Fercher, A.F. Polarization-sensitive
optical optical coherence tomography of dental structures. Caries Res. 2000, 3459–3469. [CrossRef]
15.
Fried, D.; Xie, J.; Shaﬁ, S.; Featherstone, J.D.B.; Breunig, T.; Lee, C.Q. Early detection of dental caries and lesion progression with
polarization sensitive optical coherence tomography. J. Biomed. Opt. 2002, 7(4), 618–627. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Lee, C.; Darling, C.; Fried, D. Polarization Sensitive Optical Coherence Tomographic Imaging of Artiﬁcial Demineralization on
Exposed Surfaces of Tooth Roots. Dent. Mater. 2009, 25, 721–728. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Manesh, S.K.; Darling, C.L.; Fried, D. Polarization-sensitive optical coherence tomography for the nondestructive assessment of
the remineralization of dentin. J. Biomed. Opt. 2009, 14, 044002. [CrossRef]
18.
Wada, I.; Shimada, Y.; Ikeda, M.; Sadr, A.; Nakashima, S.; Tagami, J.; Sumi, Y. Clinical assessment of non carious cervical lesion
using swept-source optical coherence tomography. J. Biophotonics 2015, 8, 846–854. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Lee, R.C.; Darling, C.L.; Fried, D. Activity assessment of root caries lesions with thermal and near-infrared imaging methods. J.
Biophotonics 2016, 10, 433–445. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Kaneko, K.; Matsuyama, K.; Nakashima, S. Quantiﬁcation of Early Carious Enamel Lesions by using an Infrared Camera in Vitro,
Early Detection of Dental Caries II. In Proceedings of the 4th Annual Indiana Conference, Indianapolis, IN, USA, 19–22 May 1999;
Indiana University School of Dentistry: Indianapolis, IN, USA, 2000; Volume 4, pp. 83–99.
21.
Usenik, P.; Burmen, M.; Fidler, A.; Pernus, F.; Likar, B. Near-infrared hyperspectral imaging of water evaporation dynamics for
early detection of incipient caries. J. Dent. 2014, 42, 1242–1247. [CrossRef]
22.
Ando, M.; Sharp, N.; Adams, D. Pulse thermography for quantitative nondestructive evaluation of sound, de-mineralized and
re-mineralized enamel. In Health Monitoring of Structural and Biological Systems; SPIE: Bellingham, WA, USA, 2012; Volume 8348,
p. 83480S.
23.
Zakian, C.M.; Taylor, A.M.; Ellwood, R.P.; Pretty, I.A. Occlusal caries detection by using thermal imaging. J. Dent. 2010, 38,
788–795. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Ando, M.; Ferreira-Zandona, A.G.; Eckert, G.J.; Zero, D.T.; Stookey, G.K. Pilot clinical study to assess caries lesion activity using
quantitative light-induced ﬂuorescence during dehydration. J. Biomed. Opt. 2017, 22, 35005. [CrossRef]
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 465
12 of 12
25.
Lee, R.C.; Darling, C.L.; Fried, D. Assessment of remineralization via measurement of dehydration rates with thermal and near-IR
reﬂectance imaging. J. Dent. 2015, 43, 1032–1042. [CrossRef]
26.
Lee, R.C.; Staninec, M.; Le, O.; Fried, D. Infrared methods for assessment of the activity of natural enamel caries lesions. IEEE J.
Sel. Top. Quant. Elect. 2014, 22, 6803609. [CrossRef]
27.
Yang, V.; Zhu, Y.; Curtis, D.; Le, O.; Chang, N.; Fried, W.; Simon, J.C.; Banan, P.; Darling, C.; Fried, D. Thermal Imaging of Root
Caries In Vivo. J. Dent. Res. 2020, 99, 1502–1508. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Lee, R.C.; Kang, H.; Darling, C.L.; Fried, D. Automated assessment of the remineralization of artiﬁcial enamel lesions with
polarization-sensitive optical coherence tomography. Biomed. Opt. Express 2014, 5, 2950–2962. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.
Nee, A.; Chan, K.; Kang, H.; Staninec, M.; Darling, C.L.; Fried, D. Longitudinal monitoring of demineralization peripheral to
orthodontic brackets using cross polarization optical coherence tomography. J. Dent. 2014, 42, 547–555. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.
Simon, J.C.; Kang, H.; Staninec, M.; Jang, A.T.; Chan, K.H.; Darling, C.L.; Lee, R.C.; Fried, D. Near-IR and CP-OCT imaging of
suspected occlusal caries lesions. Lasers Surg. Med. 2017, 49, 215–224. [CrossRef]
31.
Chan, K.H.; Tom, H.; Lee, R.C.; Kang, H.; Simon, J.C.; Staninec, M.; Darling, C.L.; Pelzner, R.B.; Fried, D. Clinical monitoring of
smooth surface enamel lesions using CP-OCT during nonsurgical intervention. Lasers Surg. Med. 2016, 48, 915–923. [CrossRef]
32.
Yang, V.B.; Fried, D. Measurement of the shrinkage of natural and simulated lesions on root surfaces with CP-OCT. J. Dent. 2019,
90, 103213. [CrossRef]
33.
Jones, R.S.; Fried, D. Remineralization of enamel caries can decrease optical reﬂectivity. J. Dent. Res. 2006, 85, 804–808. [CrossRef]
34.
Kang, H.; Darling, C.L.; Fried, D. Nondestructive monitoring of the repair of enamel artiﬁcial lesions by an acidic remineralization
model using polarization-sensitive optical coherence tomography. Dent. Mater. 2012, 28, 488–494. [CrossRef]
35.
Kidd, E.A. The histopathology of enamel caries in young and old permanent teeth. Br. Dent J 1983, 155, 196–198. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

