Citation: Gan, X.; Dou, W.; Hou, W.;
Yuan, X.; Lei, L.; Zhou, Y.; Yang, J.;
Chen, D.; Zhou, W.; Tang, D.
Low-Voltage Solution-Processed
Zinc-Doped CuI Thin Film
Transistors with NOR Logic and
Artiﬁcial Synaptic Function .
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 2345. https://
doi.org/10.3390/nano13162345
Academic Editors: In Hwan Jung and
Fabrizio Pirri
Received: 8 July 2023
Revised: 24 July 2023
Accepted: 14 August 2023
Published: 15 August 2023
Copyright:
© 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
nanomaterials
Article
Low-Voltage Solution-Processed Zinc-Doped CuI Thin Film
Transistors with NOR Logic and Artiﬁcial Synaptic Function
Xiaomin Gan, Wei Dou *
, Wei Hou, Xing Yuan, Liuhui Lei, Yulan Zhou, Jia Yang, Diandian Chen,
Weichang Zhou * and Dongsheng Tang *
Synergetic Innovation Center for Quantum Effects and Application, Key Laboratory of Low-Dimensional
Quantum Structures and Quantum Control of Ministry of Education, Hunan Normal University,
Changsha 410081, China; gxm012399@163.com (X.G.); whouhouwei@163.com (W.H.);
yx222198@163.com (X.Y.); lhlei182@163.com (L.L.); yilanchow@hunnu.edu.cn (Y.Z.);
m18890724966@163.com (J.Y.); chendiandian@hunnu.edu.cn (D.C.)
* Correspondence: douwei@hunnu.edu.cn (W.D.); wchangzhou@hunnu.edu.cn (W.Z.); dstang@hunnu.edu.cn (D.T.)
Abstract: Low-voltage Zn-doped CuI thin film transistors (TFTs) gated by chitosan dielectric were
fabricated at a low temperature. The Zn-doped CuI TFT exhibited a more superior on/off current
ratio than CuI TFT due to the substitution or supplementation of copper vacancies by Zn ions. The
Zn-doped CuI films were characterized by scanning electron microscope, X-ray diffraction, and X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy. The Zn-doped CuI TFTs exhibited an on/off current ratio of 1.58 × 104, a
subthreshold swing of 70 mV/decade, and a field effect mobility of 0.40 cm2V−1s−1, demonstrating
good operational stability. Due to the electric-double-layer (EDL) effect and high specific capacitance
(17.3 µF/cm2) of chitosan gate dielectric, Zn-doped CuI TFT operates at a voltage below −2 V. The
threshold voltage is −0.2 V. In particular, we have prepared Zn-doped CuI TFTs with two in-plane gates
and NOR logic operation is implemented on such TFTs. In addition, using the ion relaxation effect and
EDL effect of chitosan film, a simple pain neuron simulation is realized on such a p-type TFTs for the
first time through the bottom gate to regulate the carrier transport of the channel. This p-type device has
promising applications in low-cost electronic devices, complementary electronic circuit, and biosensors.
Keywords: thin ﬁlm transistors; low voltage; electric-double-layer; NOR logic operation; Zn-doped
CuI; artiﬁcial synaptic
1. Introduction
As a key element of ﬂat panel displays, TFTs have been extensively researched [1].
There are fewer investigations into the creation of p-type oxide TFTs compared to n-
type oxide TFTs because the high-quality ﬁlm growth of p-type oxide semiconductors
is complicated [2]. Several studies have been recently published on the production of
p-type oxide TFTs utilizing conventional vacuum coating techniques. Hye-Mi Kim et al.
fabricated two-step crystallization SnO-based TFTs based on atomic layer deposition [3].
Soo Hyun Kim et al. investigated the effect of annealing temperature on the quality of
SnO thin ﬁlms and fabricated high performance SnO TFTs with an on/off current ratio
of 2 × 106 [4]. Cheng Wei Shih et al. fabricated a p-type SnO TFT with a subthreshold
slope of 140 mV/dec through the introduction of oxygen during magnetron sputtering. [5]
However, high equipment costs and relatively small deposition areas limit the potential
use of traditional vacuum technology in large-area electronic equipment [6]. In 2013,
Sang Yun Kim et al. ﬁrst proposed a p-type Cu2O TFT with an on/off current ratio of
~1 × 102 and a ﬁeld effect mobility of 0.16 cm2V−1s−1 based on solution treatment [7].
Since then, several studies have been reported successively on solution-treated p-type
oxide TFTs, such as NixO TFTs, CuxO TFTs, and SnO2 TFTs [8–10]. In 2016, Jaewon Jang
et al. fabricated a CuO TFT based on copper acetate (II) precursors annealed at lower
than 500 ◦C [11]. However, because of the localized hole transport path in the valence
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 2345. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano13162345
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/nanomaterials
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 2345
2 of 11
band maximum (VBM) and the strong self-compensation during doping, p-type oxide
semiconductors exhibit poor electrical properties [12,13]. Recent theoretical studies have
shown that anions with larger p orbitals and less electronegativity are more favorable
for achieving delocalized VBM than O2-, which leads to wide research on metal halides
in the manufacture of p-type semiconductors [14]. CuI is considered the most potential
candidate on account of its signiﬁcant conductivity of 238 S·cm−1, wide bandgap (Eg)
of ~3 eV, and high doping capacity [15,16]. In addition, the high optical transmittance
and low preparation temperature (<100 ◦C) of CuI provide a new path for transparent
electronic devices. In 2020, Ao Liu et al. ﬁrst reported p-type Zn-doped CuI TFTs on
SiO2/Si substrates and conﬁrmed that Zn2+ was the optimal n-type dopant [17].
N-type semiconductor devices are widely studied for integrated circuits and flat panel
displays because of their excellent electrical properties. In 2020, Wanpeng Zhao et al. fabricated
a high-gain transparent inverter based on deuterated ZnO TFTs. The maximum voltage gain
could reach −310 V/V, which could be used as a reliable candidate for a common source
amplifier [18]. Sun Yang et al. fabricated an 8-inch flexible miniature LED display based on
indium gallium zinc oxide (IGZO) TFTs with a top gate structure [19]. The application of
p-type devices in numerous fields is extremely rare. In addition, artificial synaptic research
based on n-type semiconductor devices has also received extensive attention in recent years.
The human brain is a highly intelligent and complex information processing system that
differs from the Von Neumann structure. The calculation and storage of data processed
by the Von Neumann structure are distributed. However, the computation and storage of
information processed by the human brain are parallel. The neuronal system of the human
brain includes neurons and synapses predominantly. Neurons are connected to each other
through synapses to constitute complex three-dimensional structures. In the nervous system,
there is no clear boundary between memory and information calculation, and each synapse
of every neuron stores and processes information synchronously. Therefore, synapses and
neurons have been extensively studied in neuronal devices. Wan Qing et al. fabricated indium
gallium zinc oxide (IGZO) nanofiber photosynaptic transistors and realized high-precision
neural morphology calculations [20]. Dongliang Jiang et al. reported a solution-processed
In2O3 TFT with memory and learning functions attained by light stimulation [21]. However,
related research based on p-type devices is not common.
Moreover, resource consumption has become an issue that people must pay attention
to, especially in the power supply system and large-scale equipment production. Compared
with traditional vacuum coating technology, the preparation and application of large-area
deposition electronic devices based on the solution method are particularly important. As a
biopolymer, chitosan has the advantages of biodegradability and being naturally pollution-
free, which can greatly reduce environmental pollution and waste of resources. In addition,
chitosan is formed by N-deacetylation of chitin and is easily soluble in acidic aqueous
solutions [22]. In the gated transistor prepared by using chitosan as the dielectric, the
electric double layer is formed at the interface after the source electrode and gate electrode
apply voltage, which leads to the accumulation of carriers on one side of the channel near
the gate dielectric. More importantly, chitosan has a high dielectric constant, so the device
can work at ultra-low voltage. It facilitates the reduction in energy consumption and the
production of portable electronic equipment.
In this study, low-voltage Zn-doped CuI TFTs gated by chitosan dielectric have been
fabricated on FTO glass substrates. A large speciﬁc gate capacitance of 17.3 µF/cm2 was
obtained in the chitosan ﬁlm owing to the EDL effect, which allows TFTs to work at low
voltage. The TFTs showed good performance with a ﬁeld effect mobility of 0.40 cm2V−1s−1,
a subthreshold swing of 70 mV/decade, and an on/off current ratio of 1.58 × 104. The
threshold voltage is −0.2 V. In addition, NOR logic was realized on such p-type Zn-
doped CuI TFTs ﬁrst. Importantly, the basic operating principle of artiﬁcial synaptic
simulation based on TFT was analyzed at length. Excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSC)
and inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSC) could be achieved on this Zn-doped CuI TFT.
A simple human brain pain simulation based on the TFT was also obtained.
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 2345
3 of 11
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Synthesis of Precursor Solution
The 0.1 M CuI precursor solution was prepared by dissolving CuI in acetonitrile and
stirring at room temperature for 30 min. The Zn-doped CuI precursor solution was prepared
by mixing CuI and ZnI2 in acetonitrile and stirring for 30 min at room temperature. The
molar ratio C = NZn/(NZn + NCu) was set at 1% by ﬁxing NZn + NCu = 0.1 M. The chitosan
powder was dissolved in deionized water and acetic acid solution to make the chitosan pre-
cursor solution (mass ratio Mdeionized water:Mchitosan powder:Macetic acid solution = 40:1:1). To
form a stable solution, the chitosan precursor solution was stirred for 1 h and rigorously
mixed using a sonicator for 40 min. Then, the precursor solutions were stored in a sealed
room temperature environment. The Zn-doped CuI precursor solution was stirred for
10 min before the experiment.
2.2. Preparation for Characterization of Zn-Doped CuI Film
Sample 1 was prepared for X-ray diffraction and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
characterization of the Zn-doped CuI ﬁlm. Firstly, the SiO2/Si substrate was sequentially
sonicated in deionized water and alcohol for 45 min. Secondly, we deposited the Zn-doped
CuI precursor solution on the SiO2/Si substrates by spin coating at 3000 rpm for 20 s
and then annealing at 80 ◦C for 20 min. Sample 2 was prepared for scanning electron
microscope characterization of the Zn-doped CuI ﬁlm. Firstly, the FTO glass substrate was
sequentially sonicated in deionized water and alcohol for 45 min. Secondly, the chitosan
precursor solution is deposited on the FTO glass substrates by spin coating at 3000 rpm
for 20 s and then annealing at 80 ◦C for 30 min. Finally, we deposited the Zn-doped CuI
precursor solution on the SiO2/Si substrates by spin coating at 3000 rpm for 20 s and then
annealing at 80 ◦C for 20 min.
2.3. Fabrication of CuI TFT and Zn-Doped CuI TFTs
First, the Zn-doped CuI precursor solution was stirred at room temperature for 10 min
to obtain a uniform and stable liquid before TFT fabrication. Second, the chitosan precursor
solution was deposited on the FTO glass substrates by spin coating at 3000 rpm for 20 s and
then annealing at 80 ◦C for 30 min. Third, 90 nm-thick copper source and drain electrodes
were deposited by E-beam evaporation with a nickel shadow mask, and the channel width
and length were 1000 µm and 100 µm, respectively. Finally, we dropped the channel precursor
solution between the source and drain and turned on the spin coating machine immediately
after the gap between the source and drain was completely covered by the solution, so as to
form a flat channel film between the source and drain. Subsequently, the device was annealed
at 80 ◦C for 20 min. It is worth noting that the channel precursor solution was filtered by a
0.22 µm PTFE syringe filter before spin coating, and the rotation speed of the spin coating was
3000 rpm. It is important to mention that the structure and preparation method of CuI TFT
were completely consistent with those of Zn-doped CuI TFT.
2.4. Device of Measuring Chitosan Capacitance
First, the chitosan precursor solution was deposited on the FTO glass substrates by
spin coating at 3000 rpm for 20 s and then annealing at 80 ◦C for 30 min. Subsequently,
the top FTO electrode was deposited by radio-frequency magnetron sputtering with a
nickel shadow mask, and the top electrode width and length were 1000 µm and 100 µm,
respectively. The face-to-face area of a parallel-plate capacitor was 1000 µm × 100 µm.
2.5. Characterization Equipment
The compositions of Zn-doped CuI films were determined by X-ray diffraction (D8
Discover) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (ESCALAB250Xi). The structural characteri-
zation of the Zn-doped CuI film was obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM450). The
capacitance-frequency curve of the chitosan gate dielectrics was investigated by an impedance
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 2345
4 of 11
analyzer (Agilent 4294A). Electrical characterizations of Zn-doped CuI TFTs on FTO glass
substrates were performed by a semiconductor parameter analyzer (Keithley 4200 SCS).
3. Results and Discussion
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of Zn-doped CuI thin ﬁlms and pristine CuI
thin ﬁlms after 80 ◦C annealing are shown in Figure 1. Two Bragg reﬂection peaks were
assigned to (111) and (200), corresponding to γ-phase CuI (JCPDS card No. 76-0207). The
smaller Zn2+ (74 pm) with an ionic radius similar to Cu1+ (77 pm) can fully complement the
Cu vacancy [23]. Since a small amount of Zn2+ was doped into CuI to ﬁll or compensate for
the Cu vacancies, the crystallinity of the material was improved, and the peak was elevated.
Meanwhile, the original crystal structure was retained, and the smaller peak shift could be
ignored due to the close ionic radii of Zn2+ and Cu1+. The SEM image of Zn-doped Cul
ﬁlm annealed at 80 ◦C is shown in Figure 2a. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was
performed to calculate the elemental composition of the samples on the Zn-doped CuI ﬁlm
surface. Figure 2b–d shows the core-level spectra of Cu 2p, Zn 2p, and I 3d, respectively,
conﬁrming CuI:Zn was that only the substance present in the ﬁlm.
 
2.5. Characterization Equipment 
The compositions of Zn-doped CuI films were determined by X-ray diffraction (D8 
Discover) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (ESCALAB250Xi). The structural charac-
terization of the Zn-doped CuI film was obtained by scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM450). The capacitance-frequency curve of the chitosan gate dielectrics was investi-
gated by an impedance analyzer (Agilent 4294A). Electrical characterizations of Zn-doped 
CuI TFTs on FTO glass substrates were performed by a semiconductor parameter analyzer 
(Keithley 4200 SCS). 
3. Results and Discussion 
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of Zn-doped CuI thin films and pristine CuI thin 
films after 80 °C annealing are shown in Figure 1. Two Bragg reflection peaks were as-
signed to (111) and (200), corresponding to γ-phase CuI (JCPDS card No. 76-0207). The 
smaller Zn2+ (74 pm) with an ionic radius similar to Cu1+ (77 pm) can fully complement 
the Cu vacancy [23]. Since a small amount of Zn2+ was doped into CuI to fill or compensate 
for the Cu vacancies, the crystallinity of the material was improved, and the peak was 
elevated. Meanwhile, the original crystal structure was retained, and the smaller peak shift 
could be ignored due to the close ionic radii of Zn2+ and Cu1+. The SEM image of Zn-doped 
Cul film annealed at 80 °C is shown in Figure 2a. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) 
was performed to calculate the elemental composition of the samples on the Zn-doped 
CuI film surface. Figure 2b–d shows the core-level spectra of Cu 2p, Zn 2p, and I 3d, re-
spectively, confirming CuI:Zn was that only the substance present in the film. 
 
Figure 1. XRD patterns of CuI film and Zn-doped CuI film. 
Figure 1. XRD patterns of CuI ﬁlm and Zn-doped CuI ﬁlm.
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
5 of 12 
 
 
Figure 2. (a) SEM image of Zn-doped Cul film annealed at 80 °C; XPS spectra of (b) Cu 2p, (c) Zn 2p 
and (d) I 3d of the Zn-doped CuI film. 
The schematic diagram of the Zn-doped CuI TFTs is shown in Figure 3a. Figure 3b 
shows the specific capacitance variation with frequency of the chitosan film at room tem-
perature. It can be seen that the chitosan film exhibits a high specific capacitance, and the 
it
f th
hit
fil
d
th
f
i
At 10 H
i
Figure 2. (a) SEM image of Zn-doped Cul ﬁlm annealed at 80 ◦C; XPS spectra of (b) Cu 2p, (c) Zn 2p
and (d) I 3d of the Zn-doped CuI ﬁlm.
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 2345
5 of 11
The schematic diagram of the Zn-doped CuI TFTs is shown in Figure 3a. Figure 3b
shows the speciﬁc capacitance variation with frequency of the chitosan ﬁlm at room
temperature. It can be seen that the chitosan ﬁlm exhibits a high speciﬁc capacitance,
and the capacitance of the chitosan ﬁlm decreases as the frequency increases. At 10 Hz, a
maximum speciﬁc capacitance of 17.3 µF/cm2 is attained. Chitosan with water addition
showed signiﬁcantly higher ionic conductivity (10−5 S·cm−1) compared to dried chitosan
(10−9 S·cm−1), which led to the formation of EDL that caused the device to work at low
voltage [24,25]. The schematic diagram of the EDL formation is shown in Figure 3c. Due
to the addition of deionized water to the chitosan precursor, a part of the free amino
group in the chitosan gate dielectric ﬁlm is deprotonated, and hydroxide ions are formed
(-NH2 + H2O → NH3+ + OH−). During the preparation of chitosan precursor solution,
the introduction of acetic acid provides a large number of protons, and these movable
protons promote the protonation process. According to the Glotus mechanism, when a
voltage is applied to the gate electrode, the movable protons in the chitosan ﬁlm can be
transferred from one oxygen atom to another through hydrogen bonds. The free hydroxide
ion increases the conductivity of the chitosan gate dielectric ﬁlm, which leads to a larger
capacitance. When an appropriate negative voltage is applied to the gate electrode, a
large number of protons are gathered near the gate, and the negative ions in the chitosan
membrane are repelled to the side near the channel. Equal-density hole carriers are induced
in the channel to realize the formation of EDL. The gate leakage current of the chitosan
ﬁlm is shown in Figure 3d at a bias voltage of −2 V. A low gate leakage current of less than
2.5 nA was produced, which is three magnitude orders less than the channel current and
substantially less than that of solid polymer electrolytes or ionic liquids, demonstrating
that the inﬂuence of leakage current during device operation could be ignored [26,27].
Figure 4a shows the typical transfer characteristics of Zn-doped CuI TFTs. The response
time of the transistor was 1.3875 s during the measurement. The on/off current ratio
Ion/off, subthreshold swing SS, and threshold voltage Vth are estimated to be 1.58 × 104,
70 mV/decade, and −0.2 V, respectively. However, the Ion/off value of the pure CuI TFT
was below 103 under the same conditions, as shown in the inset of Figure 4a. The on-current
of CuI TFT is slightly larger than that of Zn-doped CuI TFT, which is caused by scattering
of Zn ion [28,29]. In addition, the solution-processed method is difﬁcult to realize the
patterned channel. In the process of deposition channel, there is part of residual channel
solution near the source electrode and the drain electrode. An edge electric ﬁeld can create
a parasitic path in the source-drain conduction near the electrode edges [30,31]. The hole
mobility decreases as Zn ions replaced or supplemented Cu vacancies, which weakens the
channel conductivity [17,32]. The decrease in electrical conductivity of channel solution
contributes to the decrease in edge electric ﬁeld. The smaller edge electric ﬁeld weakens
the unexpected contribution of the parasitic path and reduces the off-current of the TFT
obviously [31]. On the whole, the Ion/Ioff of the device doped with Zn ions is larger than
CuI TFT. The threshold voltage of CuI TFT is 2.02 V. The subthreshold swing SS of CuI
TFT is 1.05 V/decade. The ﬁeld-effect mobility (µ = [2LIds]/[(WCi)(Vgs−Vth)2]) of Zn-
doped CuI TFT is estimated to be 0.40 cm2V−1s−1, where L is the channel length, W is
the channel width, and Ci is the speciﬁc gate capacitance at 10 Hz (Ci = 17.3 µF/cm2).
Figure 4b shows the corresponding output characteristics of the Zn-doped CuI TFT. The
Vgs ranged from −1.5 V to 1.5 V in 0.5 V steps. As shown in Figure 4c, as the transfer
curve shifts to the right with Vds from −1 V to −3 V in −0.5 V steps, the values of Vth
are −0.309 V, −0.236 V, −0.205 V, −0.112 V, and −0.051 V, respectively. It was shown that
effective electrostatic coupling is performed between the source and drain electrodes and
the bottom gate [24]. Figure 4d shows the transient response of the Zn-doped CuI TFTs
driven by period square wave pulses of Vgs = 0.5 V to −1 V at Vds = −2 V. The device shows
prominent reproducibility of the current response in the control of regular pulsed Vgs. The
good electrical properties of the Zn-doped CuI TFT provide the necessary foundation for
the application of the device.
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 2345
6 of 11
 
to −3 V in −0.5 V steps, the values of Vth are −0.309 V, −0.236 V, −0.205 V, −0.112 V, and 
−0.051 V, respectively. It was shown that effective electrostatic coupling is performed be-
tween the source and drain electrodes and the bottom gate [24]. Figure 4d shows the tran-
sient response of the Zn-doped CuI TFTs driven by period square wave pulses of Vgs = 0.5 
V to −1 V at Vds = −2 V. The device shows prominent reproducibility of the current response 
in the control of regular pulsed Vgs. The good electrical properties of the Zn-doped CuI 
TFT provide the necessary foundation for the application of the device. 
 
Figure 3. (a) Schematic diagram of the Zn-doped CuI TFTs on glass substrate. (b) Specific capaci-
tance variation with frequency of the chitosan film (inset: FTO/chitosan/FTO device structure for 
capacitance measurement). (c) Schematic diagram of the EDL formation. (d) Gate leakage current of 
chitosan film. 
Figure 3. (a) Schematic diagram of the Zn-doped CuI TFTs on glass substrate. (b) Speciﬁc capaci-
tance variation with frequency of the chitosan ﬁlm (inset: FTO/chitosan/FTO device structure for
capacitance measurement). (c) Schematic diagram of the EDL formation. (d) Gate leakage current of
chitosan ﬁlm.
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
7 of 12
Figure 4. Electrical characteristics of Zn-doped CuI TFTs (a) Transfer characteristics (inset: transfer 
curves of CuI TFTs). (b) Output characteristics (inset: curves that cannot be fully displayed due to
low drain current). (c) Transfer characteristics at diﬀerent Vds. (d) Pulse response of the Zn-doped 
CuI TFTs to a square-shaped Vgs with a pulsed amplitude of V+ = 0.5 V and V− = −1 V. 
In addition, symmetric Zn-doped CuI TFTs were fabricated with two in-plane gates. 
As demonstrated in Figure 5a, the NOR logic operation was performed on one single p-
channel TFT. G1 and G2 are deﬁned as terminals of input1 and input 2, respectively. The 
positive input signal (+0.5 V) was deﬁned as logic 1, and the negative input signal (−1 V)
was deﬁned as logic 0. The channel current was deﬁned as the output. The channel current 
was blocked if either or both inputs were logic 1. The channel current was high (logic 1)
when the input signals are both negative (logic 0). The resilient operation of this logic gate 
was demonstrated through the on/oﬀ current ratio, which was maintained at 104 between 
the two logic states. The schematic diagram of the NOR logic is shown in Figure 5b. When t
(b)
Figure 4. Electrical characteristics of Zn-doped CuI TFTs (a) Transfer characteristics (inset: transfer
curves of CuI TFTs). (b) Output characteristics (inset: curves that cannot be fully displayed due to
low drain current). (c) Transfer characteristics at different Vds. (d) Pulse response of the Zn-doped
CuI TFTs to a square-shaped Vgs with a pulsed amplitude of V+ = 0.5 V and V− = −1 V.
In addition, symmetric Zn-doped CuI TFTs were fabricated with two in-plane gates.
As demonstrated in Figure 5a, the NOR logic operation was performed on one single
p-channel TFT. G1 and G2 are deﬁned as terminals of input1 and input 2, respectively. The
positive input signal (+0.5 V) was deﬁned as logic 1, and the negative input signal (−1 V)
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 2345
7 of 11
was deﬁned as logic 0. The channel current was deﬁned as the output. The channel current
was blocked if either or both inputs were logic 1. The channel current was high (logic 1)
when the input signals are both negative (logic 0). The resilient operation of this logic gate
was demonstrated through the on/off current ratio, which was maintained at 104 between
the two logic states. The schematic diagram of the NOR logic is shown in Figure 5b. When
+0.5 V is applied to both G1 and G2, protons are attracted close to the channel and form the
Helmholtz layer, and image charges with an opposite sign and equal density are induced
in the channel on the side close to the chitosan electrolyte. The channel was completely
depleted, and the device was turned off. With a +0.5 V and −1 V bias applied to G1 and G2,
respectively, the depleted region in the channel narrowed and the device remained closed.
When −1 V is applied to both G1 and G2, most of the protons in the chitosan electrolyte are
gathered around the drain electrode and the gate electrodes which induce many holes to
form accumulation areas in the channel. The TFT was in an on state in these circumstances.
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
8 of 12 
 
 
Figure 5. (a) NOR logic of such p-channel TFTs. (b) Schematic diagram of the p-channel TFTs with 
NOR logic. 
Figure 6 shows the schematic diagram of Zn-doped CuI TFTs simulating synaptic 
neurons. Presynaptic cells transmit information to postsynaptic cells through chemical 
signals or electrical signals. Synaptic types include excitatory synapses and inhibitory syn-
apses. The direction of information transmission between neurons is unidirectional. When 
neurons are stimulated, the permeability of the presynaptic membrane to calcium in-
creases, which induces some synaptic vesicles of presynaptic neurons to closely fuse with 
the presynaptic membrane. The synaptic vesicles ruptured near the presynaptic mem-
brane, and neurotransmitters were released into the synaptic space. Neurotransmitters 
spread to the postsynaptic membrane and bind to protein receptors, changing the ion per-
meability of the postsynaptic membrane. Excitation or inhibition of the postsynaptic 
membrane produces an EPSC or an IPSC, respectively. In our devices, the gate voltage 
was considered to be the stimulation of presynaptic neurons. Channel currents were de-
fined as postsynaptic currents. The postsynaptic current was regulated by the presynaptic 
electrode (gate electrode). In the whole process, the signal processing and transmission 
were parallel, which is particularly similar to the processing of neural morphological in-
formation. As shown in Figure 7, the blue pattern represents a model of different pulse. 
The purple circle emphasizes the postsynaptic current when the pulse intensity is 0 V. 
When the presynaptic electrode is stimulated by −1 V to −0.25 V in a step of 0.25 V for 10 
ms, the postsynaptic membrane is excited and a significant EPSC is produced (the resting 
potential of the presynaptic electrode is 0 V). EPSC increases with the absolute value of 
the difference between presynaptic electrode voltage and resting potential. In addition, 
when the presynaptic electrode is stimulated by 0.25 V to 1 V in a step of 0.25 V for 10 ms, 
the postsynaptic membrane produces an obvious IPSC (the resting potential of the pre-
synaptic electrode was 0 V). IPSC also increases with the absolute value of the difference 
between presynaptic voltage and resting potential. More importantly, the whole curve of 
gradual synaptic response is almost linear. 
Figure 5. (a) NOR logic of such p-channel TFTs. (b) Schematic diagram of the p-channel TFTs with
NOR logic.
Figure 6 shows the schematic diagram of Zn-doped CuI TFTs simulating synaptic
neurons. Presynaptic cells transmit information to postsynaptic cells through chemical
signals or electrical signals. Synaptic types include excitatory synapses and inhibitory
synapses. The direction of information transmission between neurons is unidirectional.
When neurons are stimulated, the permeability of the presynaptic membrane to calcium
increases, which induces some synaptic vesicles of presynaptic neurons to closely fuse
with the presynaptic membrane. The synaptic vesicles ruptured near the presynaptic
membrane, and neurotransmitters were released into the synaptic space. Neurotransmitters
spread to the postsynaptic membrane and bind to protein receptors, changing the ion
permeability of the postsynaptic membrane. Excitation or inhibition of the postsynaptic
membrane produces an EPSC or an IPSC, respectively. In our devices, the gate voltage was
considered to be the stimulation of presynaptic neurons. Channel currents were deﬁned as
postsynaptic currents. The postsynaptic current was regulated by the presynaptic electrode
(gate electrode). In the whole process, the signal processing and transmission were parallel,
which is particularly similar to the processing of neural morphological information. As
shown in Figure 7, the blue pattern represents a model of different pulse. The purple
circle emphasizes the postsynaptic current when the pulse intensity is 0 V. When the
presynaptic electrode is stimulated by −1 V to −0.25 V in a step of 0.25 V for 10 ms,
the postsynaptic membrane is excited and a signiﬁcant EPSC is produced (the resting
potential of the presynaptic electrode is 0 V). EPSC increases with the absolute value of the
difference between presynaptic electrode voltage and resting potential. In addition, when
the presynaptic electrode is stimulated by 0.25 V to 1 V in a step of 0.25 V for 10 ms, the
postsynaptic membrane produces an obvious IPSC (the resting potential of the presynaptic
electrode was 0 V). IPSC also increases with the absolute value of the difference between
presynaptic voltage and resting potential. More importantly, the whole curve of gradual
synaptic response is almost linear.
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 2345
8 of 11
 
potential of the presynaptic electrode is 0 V). EPSC increases with the absolute valu
the difference between presynaptic electrode voltage and resting potential. In addit
when the presynaptic electrode is stimulated by 0.25 V to 1 V in a step of 0.25 V for 10
the postsynaptic membrane produces an obvious IPSC (the resting potential of the 
synaptic electrode was 0 V). IPSC also increases with the absolute value of the differe
between presynaptic voltage and resting potential. More importantly, the whole curv
gradual synaptic response is almost linear. 
 
Figure 6. Schematic diagram of Zn-doped CuI TFTs simulating synaptic neurons.
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
9 of 12 
 
Figure 6. Schematic diagram of Zn-doped CuI TFTs simulating synaptic neurons. 
 
Figure 7. Postsynaptic current responses motivated by different stimuli based on Zn-doped CuI 
TFTs. 
Subsequently, simple human brain pain nerve conduction was simulated on this p-
type Zn-doped CuI TFT. The schematic diagram of pain perception in the human brain is 
shown in Figure 8. The Vgs is defined as the intensity of stimulation to the human brain. 
Channel currents are defined as EPSC produced after stimulation. As shown in Figure 8a, 
a stimulus was applied to the human brain (500 ms, −2 V), and then ~24 nA EPSC was 
produced immediately. After stimulation, EPSC decreased rapidly at first and then 
slowed down until the memory of pain almost disappeared. As shown in Figure 8b, the 
~4 nA EPSC was generated when the first stimulus is applied (200 ms, −2 V). After the 
pain memory almost disappeared, ~6 nA EPSC was produced by applying a second stim-
ulus (400 ms, −2 V). After the second pain memory almost disappeared, a third stimulus 
(600 ms, −2 V) was applied to produce a larger ~8 nA EPSC. Obviously, the EPSC produced 
by a stimulus is closely related to the stimulation time. With the increase in stimulation 
time, the larger the postsynaptic current produced, the stronger the corresponding pain. 
As shown in Figure 8c, a larger EPSC was formed by multiple consecutive stimuli at short 
intervals. The EPSC produced by the latter was slightly higher than that of the former 
when five stimuli are applied successively in a short period of time, which was caused by 
the relaxation effect of mobile ions in chitosan. After a stimulus was applied to the pre-
synaptic electrode (gate) (200 ms, −2 V), the ions in chitosan moved rapidly due to the 
electric field. A large number of carriers are induced in the channel because of the EDL 
effect. After the stimulation, the movable ions of the chitosan film will slowly return to 
their initial state. However, if another stimulus is applied before the ion has fully returned 
to the initial state, more carriers will be induced in the channel and a larger channel cur-
rent will be obtained. It reflects that the pain could be more severe when the brain is stim-
ulated again before the pain memory disappears. In addition, the relationship between 
stimulus intensity and human brain pain perception is shown in Figure 8d. The experi-
ment confirmed that a higher intensity of stimulation leads to a higher EPSC value. The 
l
th i t
it
f ti
l ti
t th b
i
th l
th
i
i
Figure 7. Postsynaptic current responses motivated by different stimuli based on Zn-doped CuI TFTs.
Subsequently, simple human brain pain nerve conduction was simulated on this p-type
Zn-doped CuI TFT. The schematic diagram of pain perception in the human brain is shown
in Figure 8. The Vgs is deﬁned as the intensity of stimulation to the human brain. Channel
currents are deﬁned as EPSC produced after stimulation. As shown in Figure 8a, a stimulus
was applied to the human brain (500 ms, −2 V), and then ~24 nA EPSC was produced
immediately. After stimulation, EPSC decreased rapidly at ﬁrst and then slowed down
until the memory of pain almost disappeared. As shown in Figure 8b, the ~4 nA EPSC was
generated when the ﬁrst stimulus is applied (200 ms, −2 V). After the pain memory almost
disappeared, ~6 nA EPSC was produced by applying a second stimulus (400 ms, −2 V).
After the second pain memory almost disappeared, a third stimulus (600 ms, −2 V) was
applied to produce a larger ~8 nA EPSC. Obviously, the EPSC produced by a stimulus is
closely related to the stimulation time. With the increase in stimulation time, the larger the
postsynaptic current produced, the stronger the corresponding pain. As shown in Figure 8c,
a larger EPSC was formed by multiple consecutive stimuli at short intervals. The EPSC
produced by the latter was slightly higher than that of the former when ﬁve stimuli are
applied successively in a short period of time, which was caused by the relaxation effect of
mobile ions in chitosan. After a stimulus was applied to the presynaptic electrode (gate)
(200 ms, −2 V), the ions in chitosan moved rapidly due to the electric ﬁeld. A large number
of carriers are induced in the channel because of the EDL effect. After the stimulation,
the movable ions of the chitosan ﬁlm will slowly return to their initial state. However,
if another stimulus is applied before the ion has fully returned to the initial state, more
carriers will be induced in the channel and a larger channel current will be obtained. It
reﬂects that the pain could be more severe when the brain is stimulated again before the
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 2345
9 of 11
pain memory disappears. In addition, the relationship between stimulus intensity and
human brain pain perception is shown in Figure 8d. The experiment conﬁrmed that a
higher intensity of stimulation leads to a higher EPSC value. The larger the intensity of
stimulation to the brain, the longer the pain memory is.
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 
10 of 12 
 
 
Figure 8. Schematic diagram of pain perception of the human brain based on Zn-doped CuI TFTs 
(a) EPSC of a single stimulus. (b) EPSC with different stimulation times (c) EPSC under five consec-
utive stimuli. (d) EPSC with different stimulus intensities. 
4. Conclusions 
In summary, Zn-doped CuI TFTs gated by chitosan film were fabricated at a low 
temperature. The XRD characterizations of CuI film and Zn-doped CuI film were com-
pared, which evidenced that the Zn ions did not change the crystal structure of CuI. How-
ever, the substitution or supplementation of copper vacancies by Zn ions elevates the elec-
trical performance of TFTs. A high specific capacitance of the chitosan film was calculated 
to be 17.3 μF/cm2, which prompted the TFTs to work at low voltage. The threshold voltage 
of Zn-doped CuI TFT is −0.2 V. Such TFTs showed significant electrical behavior. The 
on/off current ratio, field effect mobility, and subthreshold swing were estimated to be 
1.58 × 104, 0.40 cm2V−1s−1, and 70 mV/decade, respectively. Moreover, NOR logic was suc-
cessfully demonstrated on the basis of one single Zn-doped CuI TFT. More importantly, 
synaptic neuron simulation was realized on this p-channel TFT for the first time. Based on 
the Zn-doped CuI TFTs, EPSC and IPSC are realized, and the whole postsynaptic current 
is linear. In addition, a simple pain perception system of the human brain is demonstrated. 
Zn-doped CuI TFTs are favorable for the evolution of next-generation low-power elec-
tronics, complementary electronic circuits, and biosensors. 
Author Contributions: X.G. and W.D. developed the research idea and experimental design of this 
study. X.G., D.C., Y.Z., and J.Y. were responsible for data collection. X.G., W.D., W.H., X.Y., and L.L. 
interpreted and discussed the experimental results. X.G. and W.D. completed the writing and revi-
sion of the manuscript, with critical feedback from W.Z. Funding for this research was provided by 
W.D., with additional support from D.T. and W.Z. All authors made certain contributions. All au-
thors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. 
Funding: This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China 
under Grant 62104068 and Grant 11574081; in part by the Research Foundation of the Education 
Bureau of Hunan Province under Grant 20B345. 
Figure 8. Schematic diagram of pain perception of the human brain based on Zn-doped CuI TFTs
(a) EPSC of a single stimulus. (b) EPSC with different stimulation times (c) EPSC under ﬁve consecu-
tive stimuli. (d) EPSC with different stimulus intensities.
4. Conclusions
In summary, Zn-doped CuI TFTs gated by chitosan ﬁlm were fabricated at a low
temperature. The XRD characterizations of CuI ﬁlm and Zn-doped CuI ﬁlm were compared,
which evidenced that the Zn ions did not change the crystal structure of CuI. However,
the substitution or supplementation of copper vacancies by Zn ions elevates the electrical
performance of TFTs. A high speciﬁc capacitance of the chitosan ﬁlm was calculated to be
17.3 µF/cm2, which prompted the TFTs to work at low voltage. The threshold voltage of
Zn-doped CuI TFT is −0.2 V. Such TFTs showed signiﬁcant electrical behavior. The on/off
current ratio, ﬁeld effect mobility, and subthreshold swing were estimated to be 1.58 × 104,
0.40 cm2V−1s−1, and 70 mV/decade, respectively. Moreover, NOR logic was successfully
demonstrated on the basis of one single Zn-doped CuI TFT. More importantly, synaptic
neuron simulation was realized on this p-channel TFT for the ﬁrst time. Based on the Zn-
doped CuI TFTs, EPSC and IPSC are realized, and the whole postsynaptic current is linear.
In addition, a simple pain perception system of the human brain is demonstrated. Zn-
doped CuI TFTs are favorable for the evolution of next-generation low-power electronics,
complementary electronic circuits, and biosensors.
Author Contributions: X.G. and W.D. developed the research idea and experimental design of this
study. X.G., D.C., Y.Z. and J.Y. were responsible for data collection. X.G., W.D., W.H., X.Y. and L.L.
interpreted and discussed the experimental results. X.G. and W.D. completed the writing and revision
of the manuscript, with critical feedback from W.Z. Funding for this research was provided by W.D.,
with additional support from D.T. and W.Z. All authors made certain contributions. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 2345
10 of 11
Funding: This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 62104068 and Grant 11574081; in part by the Research Foundation of the Education
Bureau of Hunan Province under Grant 20B345.
Data Availability Statement: The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are available on request
from the corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China and
the Research Foundation of Education Bureau of Hunan Province for our project.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Ji, D.; Jang, J.; Park, J.H.; Kim, D.; Rim, Y.S.; Hwang, D.K.; Noh, Y.-Y. Recent progress in the development of backplane thin ﬁlm
transistors for information displays. J. Inform. Disp. 2021, 22, 1–11. [CrossRef]
2.
Yu, J.; Liu, G.; Liu, A.; Meng, Y.; Shin, B.; Shan, F. Solution-processed p-type copper oxide thin-ﬁlm transistors fabricated by using
a one-step vacuum annealing technique. J. Mater. Chem. C. 2015, 3, 9509–9513. [CrossRef]
3.
Kim, C.H.-M.; Choi, S.-H.; Jeong, H.J.; Lee, J.-H.; Kim, J.; Park, J.-S. Highly dense and stable p-Type thin-ﬁlm transistor based on
atomic layer deposition SnO fabricated by two-step crystallization. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2021, 13, 30818–30825. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
4.
Kim, S.H.; Baek, I.-H.; Kim, D.H.; Pyeon, J.J.; Chung, T.-M.; Baek, S.-H.; Kim, J.-S.; Han, J.H.; Kim, S.K. Fabrication of high-
performance p-type thin ﬁlm transistors using atomic-layer-deposited SnO ﬁlms. J. Mater. Chem. C. 2017, 5, 3139–3145. [CrossRef]
5.
Shih, C.W.; Chin, A.; Lu, C.F.; Su, W.F. Remarkably high hole mobility metal-oxide thin-ﬁlm transistors. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 889.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Xu, W.; Li, H.; Xu, J.-B.; Wang, L. Recent advances of solution-processed metal oxide thin-ﬁlm transistors. ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 2018, 10, 25878–25901. [CrossRef]
7.
Kim, S.Y.; Ahn, C.H.; Lee, J.H.; Kwon, Y.H.; Hwang, S.; Lee, J.Y.; Cho, H.K. P-channel oxide thin ﬁlm transistors using solution-
processed copper oxide. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2013, 5, 2417–2421. [CrossRef]
8.
Shan, F.; Liu, A.; Zhu, H.; Kong, W.; Liu, J.; Shin, B.; Fortunato, E.; Martins, R.; Liu, G. High-mobility p-type NiOx thin-ﬁlm
transistors processed at low temperatures with Al2O3 high-k dielectric. J. Mater. Chem. C 2016, 4, 9438–9444. [CrossRef]
9.
Liu, A.; Nie, S.; Liu, G.; Zhu, H.; Zhu, C.; Shin, B.; Fortunato, E.; Martins, R.; Shan, F. In situ one-step synthesis of p-type copper
oxide for low-temperature, solution-processed thin-ﬁlm transistors. J. Mater. Chem. C 2017, 5, 2524–2530. [CrossRef]
10.
Jang, B.; Kim, T.; Lee, S.; Lee, W.-Y.; Kang, H.; Cho, C.S.; Jang, J. High performance ultrathin SnO2 thin-ﬁlm transistors by sol-gel
method. IEEE Electron Device Lett. 2018, 39, 1179–1182. [CrossRef]
11.
Jang, J.; Chung, S.; Kang, H.; Subramanian, V. P-type CuO and Cu2O transistors derived from a sol–gel copper (II) acetate
monohydrate precursor. Thin Solid Films 2016, 600, 157–161. [CrossRef]
12.
Wang, Z.; Nayak, P.K.; Caraveo-Frescas, J.A.; Alshareef, H.N. Recent developments in p-Type oxide semiconductor materials and
devices. Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 3831–3892. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Liu, A.; Zhu, H.; Guo, Z.; Meng, Y.; Liu, G.; Fortunato, E.; Martins, R.; Shan, F. Solution combustion synthesis: Low-temperature
processing for p-type Cu:NiO thin ﬁlms for transparent electronics. Adv. Mater. 2017, 29, 1701599. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.
Zhang, K.H.L.; Xi, K.; Blamire, M.G.; Egdell, R.G. P-type transparent conducting oxides. J. Phys. Condens. Mat. 2016, 28, 383002.
[CrossRef]
15.
Yang, C.; Knei, M.; Lorenz, M.; Grundmann, M. Room-temperature synthesized copper iodide thin ﬁlm as degenerate p-type
transparent conductor with a boosted ﬁgure of merit. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016, 113, 12929–12933. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Yuan, X.; Dou, W.; Wang, Y.; Zeng, J.; Wang, L.; Lei, L.; Tang, D. Solution-Processed p-Type CuI Thin-Film Transistors with NAND
Logic Function. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 2022, 69, 6480–6484. [CrossRef]
17.
Liu, A.; Zhu, H.; Park, W.-T.; Kim, S.-J.; Kim, H.; Kim, M.-G.; Noh, Y.-Y. High-performance p-channel transistors with transparent
Zn doped CuI. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 4039. [CrossRef]
18.
Zhao, W.; Han, L.; Zhang, N.; Zhang, X.; Dong, S.; Liu, Y.; Ye, Z. High-gain transparent inverters based on deuterated ZnO TFTs
fabricated by atomic layer deposition. IEEE Electron Device Lett. 2020, 41, 1508–1511. [CrossRef]
19.
Sun, Y.; Fan, J.; Liu, M.; Zhang, L.; Jiang, B.; Zhang, M.; Zhang, X. Highly transparent, ultra-thin ﬂexible, full-color mini-LED
display with indium–gallium–zinc oxide thin-ﬁlm transistor substrate. J. Soc. Inf. Disp. 2020, 28, 926–935. [CrossRef]
20.
Zhu, Y.; Mao, H.; Zhu, Y.; Zhu, L.; Chen, C.; Wang, X.; Ke, S.; Fu, C.; Wan, C.; Wan, Q. Photoelectric synapse based on InGaZnO
nanoﬁbers for high precision neuromorphic computing. IEEE Electron Device Lett. 2022, 43, 651–654. [CrossRef]
21.
Jiang, D.; Li, J.; Fu, W.; Chen, Q.; Yang, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Zhang, J. Light-stimulated artificial synapse with memory and learning functions
by utilizing an aqueous solution-processed In2O3/AlLiO thin-film transistor. ACS Appl. Electron. Mater. 2020, 2, 2772–2779. [CrossRef]
22.
Ogawa, K.; Yui, T.; Okuyama, K. Three D structures of chitosan. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2004, 34, 1–8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Lee, K.; Oh, J.G.; Kim, D.; Baek, J.; Kim, I.H.; Nam, S.; Jeong, Y.J.; Jang, J. Copper iodide and oxide semiconductor thin ﬁlms
patterned by spray-spin coating for fabricating complementary inverters: Improving stability with passivation layers. Appl. Surf.
Sci. 2022, 608, 155081. [CrossRef]
Nanomaterials 2023, 13, 2345
11 of 11
24.
Dou, W.; Zhu, L.; Jiang, J.; Wan, Q. Flexible dual-gate oxide TFTs gated by chitosan ﬁlm on paper substrates. IEEE Electron Device
Lett. 2013, 34, 259–261. [CrossRef]
25.
Yuan, X.; Dou, W.; Gan, X.; Hou, W.; Lei, L.; Zhou, W.; Tang, D. Junctionless Electric-Double-Layer Thin-Film Transistors with
Logic Functions. Phys. Status Solidi Rapid Res. Lett. 2023, 28, 2200480. [CrossRef]
26.
Cho, J.H.; Lee, J.; Xia, Y.; Kim, B.; He, Y.Y.; Renn, M.J.; Lodge, T.P.; Frisbie, C.D. Printable ion-gel gate dielectrics for low-voltage
polymer thin-ﬁlm transistors on plastic. Nat. Mater. 2008, 7, 900–906. [CrossRef]
27.
Zhou, J.; Wu, G.; Guo, L.; Zhu, L.; Wan, Q. Flexible transparent junctionless TFTs with oxygen-tuned indium-zinc-oxide channels.
IEEE Electron Device Lett. 2013, 34, 888–890. [CrossRef]
28.
Duboué-Dijon, E.; Mason, P.E.; Fischer, H.E.; Jungwirth, P. Hydration and ion pairing in aqueous Mg2+ and Zn2+ solutions:
Force-ﬁeld description aided by neutron scattering experiments and ab initio molecular dynamics simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B
2017, 122, 3296–3306. [CrossRef]
29.
Liu, H.-Y.; Chen, W.-T.; Hsu, P.-H. Ultrathin Mg0.05Sn0.95Ox-Based Thin-Film Transistor by Mist Chemical Vapor Deposition. IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices 2021, 68, 3390–3395. [CrossRef]
30.
Kim, C.H.; Tondelier, D.; Geffroy, B.; Bonnassieux, Y.; Horowitz, G. Characterization of the pentacene thin-ﬁlm transistors with an
epoxy resin-based polymeric gate insulator. Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phy. 2012, 57, 20201. [CrossRef]
31.
Huang, F.; Xu, Y.; Pan, Z.; Li, W.; Chu, J. Direct patterning on top-gate organic thin-ﬁlm transistors: Improvement of on/off ratio,
subthreshold swing, and uniformity. IEEE Electron Device Lett. 2020, 41, 1082–1085. [CrossRef]
32.
Tsuji, M.; Iimura, S.; Kim, J.; Hosono, H. Hole concentration reduction in CuI by Zn substitution and its mechanism: Toward
Device Application. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2022, 14, 33463–33471. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

